There were thirty-eight patients on the bus the morning I left for Hanover , most of them disturbed and hallucinating . An interne , a nurse and two attendants were in charge of us . I felt lonely and depressed as I stared out the bus window at Chicago's grim , dirty West Side . It seemed incredible , as I listened to the monotonous drone of voices and smelled the fetid odors coming from the patients , that technically I was a ward of the state of Illinois , going to a hospital for the mentally ill . I suddenly thought of Mary Jane Brennan , the way her pretty eyes could flash with anger , her quiet competence , the gentleness and sweetness that lay just beneath the surface of her defenses . We had become good friends during my stay at Cook County Hospital . I had told her enough about myself to offset somewhat the damaging stories that had appeared in local newspapers after my little adventure in Marshall Field & Co. . She knew that I lived at a good address on the Gold Coast , that I had once been a medical student and was thinking of returning to the university to finish my medical studies . She knew also that I was unmarried and without a single known relative . She wasn't quite sure that I felt enough remorse about my drinking , or that I would not return to it once I was out and on my own again . This had worried her . `` I read those newspaper stories about you '' , she had said . `` You must have loved that girl very much , but you couldn't have meant it when you said that you wanted to kill her '' . `` Why do you say that '' ? ? I asked . `` I was full of booze and , well , a drunk is apt to do anything he says he'll do '' . Nonsense ! ! I grew up in an Irish neighborhood on Chicago's West Side . Don't tell me about drunks . You're not the kind to go violent . Were you in love with that girl '' ? ? `` Would it make any difference to you if I were , Mary Jane '' ? ? She met my eyes , suddenly angry . `` I wouldn't have gone into nursing if I didn't care about people . I'm interested in every patient I've helped take care of . When I think of people like you , well , I '' -- `` You what , Mary Jane '' ? ? `` You are young , intelligent , have a whole lifetime before you to make something worth while of yourself , but you mess it up with whiskey , indifference , self-destructive attitudes . I don't blame that girl for breaking her engagement with you . Was she pretty '' ? ? `` Oh , yes '' , I said , feeling annoyed , `` she was very pretty . You don't believe that I'm going back to medical school and finish , do you '' ? ? `` Why should I ? ? I've worked this ward for three months now . We keep getting the same ones back again and again . They all mean well , have great promises to make when they are about to go home , but drinking is their sickness . You've not seemed like them , but maybe you are . You've treated your stay here like a big joke . It's not a joke to be sent to a place like this or to Hanover . I wanted to go to college , too '' -- `` Why didn't you '' ? ? I asked . `` Chicago has some of the best '' -- Her eyes flashed angrily . `` That's what I mean about you , Anderson '' , she said . `` You don't seem to know much about reality . I'll tell you why I didn't go to college ; ; I'm the oldest of six children . My father's a policeman and makes less than seven thousand dollars a year . There was no money for tuition , for clothes , for all the things you apparently take for granted . Nurses' training here doesn't cost anything . They even pay me six dollars a month . I think it's a good deal . I'm going to become a good nurse , and I've got two baby brothers that are going to have college if I have to work at my profession until I'm an old maid to give it to them '' . `` Do you have a boy friend '' ? ? I asked . `` That's none of your business '' , she said , then changed the subject . `` What about your father and mother , don't you think of them when you're in a place like this '' ? ? `` My father and mother died when I was two years old '' , I said . `` My aunt raised me . Aunt Mary died when I was doing my military service . I have no one but myself to worry about '' . Something in my voice must have touched her deeply because her anger passed quickly , and she turned away to keep me from seeing her face . `` I'm sorry '' , she said . `` I don't know what I'd do without my family . We've always been so close '' . `` Tell me more about them '' . Her eyes became bright as she talked about her father and mother , aunts and uncles , cousins . Listening , I felt cheated and lonely as only an orphan can . When she had finished I said : `` Your dad sounds like a good father and a good policeman . I'll bet he wouldn't be pleased if a rumdum like me were to ask his daughter for a date -- I mean , after I'm out of the hospital , a month or so from now '' . `` My father is a sergeant of detectives and has been attached to Homicide for five years . He's a pretty good judge of character , Anderson . I don't think he'd mind too much if he were sure you'd decided not to be a rumdum in the future '' . `` What about you ? ? How would you feel about it if I were to ask you for a date when I get through at Hanover '' ? ? `` If I thought you were serious about going back to school , that you'd learned something from your experiences here and at Hanover -- well , I might consider such an offer . What about your that girl you were going to kill '' ? ? It suddenly seemed very important to me that Mary Jane Brennan should know the truth about me -- that I was not the confused , sick , irresponsible person she believed me to be . `` There are things about me that I can't tell you now , Mary Jane '' , I said , `` but if you'll go out to dinner with me when I get out of Hanover , I'd like to tell you the whole story . I can say this : I'm dead serious about going back to school . As for that other girl , let's just say that I never want to see her again . You will get to come home on long weekends from Hanover , won't you '' ? ? `` Yes , I'll get one overnight a month '' . `` We'll go up to the Edgewater Beach Hotel for dinner '' , I said . `` Do you like to dance ? ? They always have a good orchestra '' . `` I like to dance '' , she said , then turned and walked away . There hadn't been anything really personal in her interest in me . I knew that . It was just that she felt deeply about every patient on the ward and wanted to believe that they might benefit from their treatment there . Now , riding this hospital bus , feeling isolated and utterly alone , I knew that she was genuine and unique , quite unlike any girl I had known before . It seemed the most important thing in my life at this moment that she should know the real truth about me . It was a fantastic story . Only two people in the state of Illinois knew that I was entering Hanover State Hospital under an assumed name , or why . It was unlikely that any girl as sharp as Mary Jane Brennan would believe it without proof . But I had the proof , all documented in a legal agreement which I would show her the moment I was free to do so . As the bus turned into the main highway and headed toward Hanover I settled back in my seat and closed my eyes , thinking over the events of the past two weeks , trying to put the pieces in order . I wondered suddenly as I listened to the disconnected jabberings coming from the patient behind me , if I had not perhaps imagined it all . Perhaps this was reality and Dale Nelson , the actor , was delusion ; ; a figment of Carl Anderson's imagination . Four I had come to Chicago from New York early in September with a dramatic production called Ask Tony . It was a bad play , real grade-A turkey , which only a prevalence of angels with grandiose dreams of capital gain and tax money to burn could have put into rehearsal . No one , not even the producer , had any real hope of getting it back to Broadway . But because it was a suspense gangster story of the Capone era , many of us felt that it might catch on for a run in Chicago , continue as a road company , and eventually become a movie . Such optimism was completely unjustified . The critics literally screamed their indignation . Ask Tony was doomed from the moment Kupcinet leveled on it in his Sun-Times column . We opened on Friday and closed the following Monday . Out of the entire cast I alone received good notices for my portrayal of a psychopathic killer . This let me in for a lot of kidding from the rest of the company , two members of which were native Chicagoans . We were paid off Tuesday morning and given tickets back to New York . I felt lonely and depressed as I packed my bags at the Croydon Hotel . It seemed to me that my life was destined to be one brilliant failure after another . I had been among the top third in my class at N.Y.U. , had wanted desperately to go to medical school , but I'd run out of money and energy at the same time . Then later I had quit my safe , secure five-a-week spot on a network soap opera to take a part in this play . It seemed to me that I was not only unlucky but quite stupid as well . I knew that I'd soon be back working as an orderly at the hospital or as a counterman at Union News or Schraffts while waiting for another acting job to open . It suddenly occurred to me that I did not particularly like acting , that I was at some sort of crossroads and would have to decide soon what I was going to do with my life . I closed the last bag and stood all three at the door for the bellboy to pick up , then went to the bathroom for a drink of water . The telephone rang . When I answered it a voice too dignified and British to be real said , `` Is this Mr. Dale Nelson , the actor '' ? ? `` All right '' , I said . `` Why don't you bastards lay off for a while '' ? ? `` I beg your pardon , sir '' ? ? `` All right . This is Dale Nelson the actor '' . `` Good . I'm calling you , Mr. Nelson , at the request of Mr. Phillip Wycoff . Could you possibly have lunch with him today ? ? His car could pick you up at your hotel at twelve '' . I smiled . `` You'll send the Rolls-Royce , of course '' ? ? `` Yes , of course , Mr. Nelson '' . I started to say something else appropriate , but the man had hung up . I finally went downstairs to the bar off the main lobby where most of the cast were drowning their sorrows over the untimely passing of Ask Tony . They all bowed low as I approached them . `` All right , you bastards '' , I said , `` the great actor is about to buy a drink '' . I laid a tenspot on the bar and motioned to the bartender to serve a round . He had just returned my change when the doorman came in off the street to page me . I walked over to him . `` You Mr. Nelson '' ? ? He asked . `` That's right '' . `` Mr. Wycoff's car is waiting for you at the east entrance '' . I followed him out through the lobby to the street . An ancient Rolls-Royce , as shiningly impressive as the day it came off the ship , was parked at the curb . The elderly chauffeur , immaculate in a dark uniform , stood stiffly at attention holding open the door of the town car . I was giving the parked cars the once-over . The Oldsmobile with the license number JYJ 114 was in stall number five . `` Okay '' , I said to the attendant , `` I'll let you know if I close the deal on the office in this building '' . I walked with him back to the entrance . He gave me a ticket on the agency car and parked it . I was back in ten minutes . `` Forgot to get something out of the car '' , I told him , showing him my ticket . He started to say something as I walked in and then suddenly grinned and said , `` Oh , yes . You're the one I was talking to about a monthly rental . `` That's right '' , I told him . He consulted the parking ticket , then looked at a notation and said , `` You're in the third row back toward the rear . Can you find it all right '' ? ? `` Sure '' , I told him . I went back to the agency car and got out an electric bug , one of the newest devices for electronic shadowing . I always keep a set in the car . I put in new batteries so as to be certain I'd have plenty of power and on my way out walked over to the regular parking stalls and stood looking at them thoughtfully . I waited until the parking attendant was busy with a customer , then slipped around the back of the car with license number JYM 114 , attached the electronic bug to the rear bumper and walked out . The attendant waved me on . One of the hardest chores a detective has is hanging around on a city street , trying to make himself inconspicuous , keeping an eye on the entrance of an office building and waiting . For the first fifteen or twenty minutes it's possible to be more or less interested in window displays , then in people passing by . After a while , however , a person's mind gets fed up and that magnifies all of the disagreeable physical symptoms which go with that sort of an assignment . You want to sit down . Your leg muscles and back muscles feel weary . You're conscious of the fact that your feet hurt , that the city pavements are hard . I waited a solid two hours before my man came out of the office building . He came out alone . I wasn't far behind him when he entered the parking lot and hurried over to his car . The attendant recognized me once more and said , `` What did you do about that office '' ? ? `` I haven't made up my mind yet '' , I said . `` It's a sublease . I have a couple of them I'm figuring on ; ; one here and one that's out quite a ways where there's usually curb parking '' . `` That curb parking is undependable and annoying , particularly when it rains '' , he said . I kept trying to get him to take my money . `` Okay '' , I told him . `` I'm in a rush right now . I know where the car is . Want me to drive it out '' ? ? `` I'll have one of the boys get it '' , he said . `` It's one of the rules on transients . Regulars drive out their own cars '' . `` Make it as snappy as you can , will you '' ? ? I asked . `` Oh , that's all right '' , he said . `` You're going to be a regular . You'll get in the office building here . You don't want to lease a place way out in the sticks . You get business where the business is , not where it isn't '' . I grinned at him , handed him a couple of dollars and said , `` By the time you get the parking charge figured up , there should be a cigar in it for you '' . I hurried over to the agency heap , jumped in , started the motor and was just in time to see the car I wanted to shadow turn to the left . I was held up a bit trying to make a left turn . By the time I'd made it he was gone . Traffic was pretty heavy . I turned on the electric bug , and the signal came in loud and clear . I made time and picked him up within ten blocks . I stayed half a block behind him , letting lots of cars keep in between us , listening to the steady beep beep beep . After fifteen minutes of traffic driving he turned to the left . I couldn't see him , but the electric bugging device gave steady beeps when it was straight ahead , short half beeps when the car I was following was to the left , and long drawn-out beeps when it turned to the right . If it ever got behind me , the beep turned to a buzz . I turned left too soon and got a signal showing that I was still behind him but he was to the right . After a while the signal became a buzz and I knew he was behind me . That meant he'd parked someplace . I made a big circle until I located the car parked at the curb in front of an apartment house . I found a parking place half a block away , sat in the car and waited . My quarry was in the apartment house for two hours . Then he came out and started driving toward the beach . By this time it was dark . I could get up close to him where there was traffic but had to drop far behind when there wasn't traffic . My lights would have been a giveaway if I'd tried to shadow him in the conventional manner . Moreover , I'd have lost him if it hadn't been for the electronic shadowing device . His signal was coming loud and clear and then all of a sudden it turned to a buzz . I circled the block and found he was in the parking lot of a high-class restaurant . I sat where I could watch the exit and realized I was hungry . I sat there with the faint odor of charcoal-broiled steaks tantalizing my nostrils and occasionally catching the aroma of coffee . My man came out an hour later , drove to the beach , turned right and after half a mile went to the Swim and Tan Motel . It was a fairly modern motel with quite a bit of electrical display in front . I remembered it was the Peeping Tom place . I waited until my man was coming out of the office with the key to a cabin before I went in to register . The card the man I was shadowing had filled out was still on the counter . I noticed that he was in Unit 12 and that he had registered under the name of Oscar L. Palmer and wife , giving a San Francisco address . He had written out the license number of his car but had transposed the last two figures , an old dodge which is still good . Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the motel manager doesn't check the license number on the plates against the license number the tenant writes out . If he does , it's still better than an even chance he won't notice the transposition of the numbers , and if he should notice it , the thing can be passed off as an honest mistake . I used the alias of Robert C. Richards , gave the first three letters and the first and last figure of the license number on the agency heap , but a couple of phony numbers in between . I could have written anything . The manager of the motel was a woman who apparently didn't care . She was complying with the law in regard to registrations but she certainly wasn't checking license numbers or bothering the tenants . `` You mean you're all alone , Mr. Richards '' ? ? `` That's right '' . `` Your wife isn't going to join you -- later '' ? ? `` I don't think so '' . `` If you expect her to show up '' , she said , `` you'd better put ' and wife ' on there . It's a formality , you know '' . `` Any difference in the rate '' ? ? I asked . `` Not to you '' , she said smiling . `` It's ten dollars either way . There are ice cubes in a container at the far end and in another by the office . There are three soft-drink vending machines , and if you should be joined by -- anybody -- try to keep things quiet , if you will . We like to run a nice quiet place '' . `` Thank you '' , I told her . I took another sidelong glance at the other registration card , then took the key to Unit 13 that she had given me and went down long enough to park the car . The construction was reasonably solid ; ; not like the cracker-box construction of so many of the motel units that have stucco all over the outside but walls that are thin enough so you can hear every movement of the people in the adjoining apartment . I put a small electric amplifier against the wall on the side I wanted to case . With the aid of that I could hear my man moving around , heard him cough a couple of times , heard the toilet flush , heard the sound of water running . Whoever his companion was going to be , she was going to join him later . She knew where to come . He didn't have to telephone . I was so hungry my stomach felt all lines of communication had been severed . It's one thing to go without food when you're occupied with some work or when you're simply postponing a meal , but when you're dependent on someone else and know that you can't eat until he's bedded down for the night , hunger can be a gnawing torture . I had noticed a drive-in down the road a quarter of a mile . The batteries on the bugging device I had put on the car were still fresh enough to send out good strong signals . The powerful microphone I could press against the wall between my motel unit and that occupied by the man would bring in the sound of any conversation , and I was positively nauseated I was so hungry . I got in the car , drove down to the drive-in and ordered a couple of hamburgers with everything included , a cup of coffee and the fastest service possible . The place wasn't particularly busy at that time of night , and the girl who was waiting on me , who was clothed in the tightest-fitting pair of slacks I had ever seen on a woman and a sweater that showed everything there was -- and there was lots of it -- wanted to be sociable . `` You really in a hurry , Handsome '' ? ? She asked . `` I'm in a hurry , Beautiful '' . `` It's early in the evening to be in a hurry . There's lots of time left '' . `` There may not be any women left '' , I said . She gave a little pout and said , `` I don't get off work until eleven o'clock . That's when my evening commences '' . `` I'll be here at ten-fifty-five '' , I said . `` Oh , you ! ! '' She announced . `` That's what they all say . What's that thing going buzz-buzz-buzz in your car '' ? ? I said `` Darn it , that's the automatic signal that shows when the ignition key is on . I didn't turn it off '' . I reached over and switched off the electronic bugging device . She went in to get the hamburgers , and I switched on the device again and kept the signal from Dowling's car coming in steady and clear until I saw her starting back with the hamburgers . Then I shut off the device again . She wanted to hang around while I was eating . `` Don't you think it's selfish to have dinner before you go to pick her up '' ? ? `` No '' , I said . `` It's a kindness to her . You see , she's on a diet . She'll eat just a pineapple and cottage cheese salad and I'm to have one with her so she won't feel out of place '' . `` Diets can be terrible '' , the girl said . `` How much overweight is she '' ? ? `` Not a bit '' , I said , `` but she's keeping her figure in hand '' . She looked at me provocatively . `` Good figures should be kept in hand '' , she said , and walked away with an exaggerated wiggle . I turned on the device again , half fearful that I might find silence , but the buzzes came in loud and clear . When I switched on the lights for her to come and get the check , I had the exact change plus a dollar tip . The fat man said , `` All we gotta do is go around the corner '' . The gun moved . The thin man said , `` That-a-way '' . `` -- second building on the right '' . `` -- it says police right on the door '' . `` -- so even if we was as dumb as you take us for , we could still find it '' . Roberta and Dave began to back toward the door . The thin man waved the gun again . He said , `` Right around the corner '' . `` It says water works , but there is a policeman on duty , too '' . `` A night policeman just like in the States . You know '' ? ? `` Canada doesn't have much of this here juvenile delinquency problem , but we keep a night policeman all the same on account of the crazy tourists '' . At the door , Dave paused to feel for the latch . Roberta glanced up at her husband . He was going to be sensible and not try to do anything rash with that gun pointed at him . She measured the distance from where they stood to the men and the gun , measured the distance from the men to the back room . She decided to risk it . There was something phony about all this gun waving -- something not quite what it seemed in the detailed directions for finding the police . Dave had the latch under his thumb now and he removed his arm from his wife in order to pull the door open . In a flash she was away to the back , paying no attention to three angry shouts from the male throats . She tore open the back door . It was dark inside the room but enough light spilled from the restaurant behind her to enable her to make out a round table with a green cloth top . There was a small sideboard with some empty beer bottles on it and perhaps fifteen wooden chairs . Slowly she turned to face the men again . Rat-face at the counter was on his feet . The distance between where she stood and where Dave waited at the outside door was a hundred miles . Keeping her frightened gaze on the men at the counter , she began to feel her way to the door . She sidled along the booths one step at a time . The gun followed her . As she reached Dave and felt his arm go around her , felt him pull her to the safety of his person , she knew with the certainty of despair that something bad had happened to Lauren . The two men watched as Dave closed the door behind them , watched them cross the sidewalk to their car . It was getting light . The fat man removed his apron , put on a greasy and wrinkled jacket , and zipped it over his paunch . The thin man moved swiftly to the phone and dialed a number . When he was answered , he said , `` Albert ? ? Vince . I'm sending you a couple of customers -- yeah -- just get them out of my hair and keep them out -- I don't give a damn what you tell them -- only don't believe a word they say -- they're out to make trouble for me and it is up to you to stop them -- I don't care how -- and one more thing -- Cate's Cafe closed at eleven like always last night and Rose and Clarence Corsi left for Quebec yesterday -- some shrine or other -- I think it was called Saint Simon's -- yeah , yesterday . Got it '' ? ? He turned from the phone and strode to the front of the restaurant . The white Buick hadn't moved away yet . Good . A line of worry formed , a twitch pulled his mouth over to one side . He said , `` Grosse ? ? You ain't kidding me -- the kid don't know the name of this town '' ? ? `` I ain't kidding you , Vince . How could she ? ? She musta been walking in her sleep -- you seen her yourself in here '' . `` Howda I know '' ? ? `` Remember how she looked when Barney held the door for her ? ? Kinda like a zombie ? ? She was just waking up when we found her at the garage '' . Vince swore . `` Stupid fools -- ain't got enough brains between the two of you '' -- Grosse muttered , his head down , one hand playing with the zipper on his jacket . `` -- had enough brains to call ya up so as ya could do sompin about it when the parents -- I coulda let her go go '' -- His eyes were lowered , so he couldn't have seen the narrow , pointed face of his companion suddenly writhe with fury ; ; but he was aware of it just the same . He knew Vince Steiner was one of those men who had to work up a fury once in a while just to prove how dangerous he could be . With a curse , Vince seized the thing nearest , a glass sugar container with a spouted metal top , and threw it against the wall opposite . The heavy glass didn't break , but the top flew off ; ; sugar sprayed with a hiss that was loud in the silence . Not really startled , but careful to appear so , Grosse sucked noisily on his pipe . Vince cursed steadily . `` Why does everything have to happen to me '' ? ? Grosse quietly got a broom and started to sweep up the sugar . Vince watched him . His mouth worked over the profanity , the obscenities in his vocabulary . Once he said , `` Why'n hell didn't you look in the back seat of the car before you drove off ? ? Don't you and Barney ever use your brains '' ? ? The fat man didn't answer . He got one of the menus and brushed the spilled sugar onto it and carried it to a box on the floor behind the counter . He returned the menu to its place between catchup bottle and paper napkin dispenser . He spoke soothingly . `` She don't know nothing about them cars . She thinks she's in a ordinary garage '' . `` How do you know , stupid ? ? And put Cate's gun back '' . `` I know '' . Grosse tucked the gun under the counter . `` -- one word of this gets to Guardino '' -- `` Who's telling Guardino '' ? ? Vince swore again . `` You get that kid over to Rose's house '' . The fat man winced . He ran a finger down his cheek , tracing the scratch there . `` Why can't I leave her locked up in the tool crib '' ? ? The thin man stopped his pacing long enough to glance at the clock . `` You and Barney get her over to Rose's before it gets too light . After Guardino's left , we'll dump the kid somewhere near the border where she kin get home . God help you if she knows where she's been '' . Grosse spread his hands . `` What am I going to do with her all day ? ? In the tool crib she can't get away '' . `` What the hell do I care what you do with her all day ? ? Just get her where Guardino won't see her and start asking questions '' . Grosse swore now . `` Dammit all , Vince . I ain't no baby sitter '' . Vince shouted finally , `` Get her over to Rose's and I'll come by and see that she stays put '' . Grosse rubbed the bridge of his nose where it was swollen . He spoke sullenly . `` You don't hafta get nasty . I wish you luck when you try scaring that kid '' . Suddenly he grinned . His voice lost its sullen tones and he chuckled . `` I got one question '' . `` What is it '' ? ? Impatiently . `` Are you a poor dumb Canadian or a smart aleck from the States '' ? ? Vince lifted his hand as if to strike , but his thin lips spread in a smile . Grosse ducked and sniggered . `` Where'd you say you was born '' ? ? `` In a Chicago slum just like you . And I ain't going back there on account of one lousy kid '' . Lauren Landis rubbed her face against the blanket . She had cried a little because she was frightened . She could easily understand why the two men had been startled to find a strange girl in the back seat of their car ( she had figured that out ) , but she couldn't understand their subsequent actions . Was it because she had shown panic ? ? Who could blame her for that ? ? It was one thing to awaken outside a restaurant where your parents were eating and quite another to awaken in a strange garage and know your parents had gone on home without you . She was glad the fat man had left . Barney was not really frightening . She jumped as the little man now appeared at the window and , reaching through the opening , offered her a bottle of coke . She smiled at him wetly . Although she found she was thirsty , she was about to refuse ( never , never take candy from a strange man ) when she saw the bottle was unopened . He placed a bottle opener on the counter . So , he understood her panic . She blew her nose on a tissue and opened the coke bottle . It was icy cold and tasted delicious . She felt a lift in spirit . When she was finished she pushed it back . The man was busy doing something to the inside of the door-frame on the driver's side of a car . She called softly , `` Barney '' . He looked in her direction but he didn't answer . She said , `` Barney , why is he keeping me here '' ? ? Still no answer . He seemed to be looking at a point above the little window . Lauren said , `` Why can't I call my home ? ? Or borrow some money from someone and go home by bus ? ? I could send the money right back '' . Barney finished the cigarette he had been smoking . He dropped it and carefully ground it to nothing with the sole of his heavy shoe . Now he looked at her . He said , `` I only work here '' . Lauren said , `` Please '' ? ? But he was back at work on a car . She dropped her head on her arms on the counter . How could he be kind one moment and cruel the next ? ? Did he know something that made him feel sad and sorry for her ? ? And was he afraid to do anything as definite as releasing her ? ? Her heart was thumping painfully ; ; the unknown was so much worse than -- what dangers lay ahead for her ? ? What awful thing had she to face in the next few hours ? ? Something wet and hot was trickling on her wrists . Tears ? ? With a sturdy act of will she turned her mind away from herself ; ; as long as she could do nothing constructive about the situation she was in , she would think about something else . Her mother and father , for instance . Where were they now ? ? In her mind she followed the white Buick along the road somewhere between here and the Niagara River . Her father's attention would be on the road ahead and it wouldn't deviate an inch until he crossed the bridge at the Falls and took the River Road to LaSalle and , finally , turned in at their own driveway at 387 Heather Heights . Then he would yawn and stretch and shout , `` All out . This is the end of the line '' . And what would her mother be doing right now ? ? Her mother would be fast asleep curled up against that wonderful , big , safe , solid shoulder next to her on the front seat . Lauren Landis was in trouble and she was alone . Roberta Landis put her hand on her husband's arm as he slid in the driver's seat beside her . Somewhere birds were sweetly calling , were answered . Her teeth chattered so that she made three attempts at speech before she became intelligible . `` Dave . I saw that woman's apron behind the door . There was a wet spot -- she couldn't have been gone long '' . Dave made some sound meant to convey agreement . He inserted the car key in the lock . Roberta was violently trembling . She stammered , `` You heard what he said about police ? ? Why don't we drive around the corner '' ? ? The car door crashed shut . The engine throbbed into life . Dave said , `` I got the message . We're going '' . Roberta said , `` no . You go . Walk . Suppose Lauren comes looking for us ? ? I can sit here in the car while you walk around the corner '' . The big car sprang away from the curb like something alive . He said , `` I'm not going to leave my wife and my car out here in sight of those '' -- Roberta glanced at him and stopped trembling . His jowls were spiked by barbs of graying beard . His small , mean eyes regarded Marty steadily , unblinkingly . His eyes were threaded by little filaments of red as if tiny veins had burst and flooded blood into them . As he chewed his gum and exuded wheezing breath , Marty smelt the reek of bad whiskey . Marty recognized the man . He had driven the car that passed them on the road outside Admassy's place . This was Acey Squire , proprietor of the juke joint . Marty smiled at Squire pleasantly and said , `` There was a cab waiting for me here . Do you know where it might have gone '' ? ? Squire chewed his gum , his jaw moving in a steady rhythm . He looked straight at Marty . He did not answer . Marty scanned the faces of the others nearest him , looked into their staring eyes . `` Did anyone see my cab '' ? ? He asked , keeping his voice casual . He avoided showing any surprise or annoyance when no one answered him . `` I have to get back to Jarrodsville '' , he went on . `` I see there are some cars here . I wonder if one of you gentlemen could drive me back to town ? ? I'd be happy to pay for the favor , of course '' . The seventeen men stood and stared at him for a moment longer . And then a startling thing occurred . It was so utterly unexpected that Marty stood for several moments with his mouth hanging open foolishly after it had happened . There was no word spoken , no apparent signal given . Yet the men all moved at the same instant . They piled into the waiting cars , motors roared , the cars sped off . The station wagon and the old Plymouth headed east toward Jarrodsville . The Ford and the pickup truck sped west toward Sanford's Run . In seconds all four cars were out of sight . Marty Land stood alone on a red-clay road as storm clouds gathered ominously in the sky again . From a great distance thunder growled and broke the silence . Land looked back toward the dilapidated house . He thought he saw a pale face at a window . Perhaps it was Dora May . Perhaps she would be glad that they hadn't hurt him . There were other farmhouses nearby . Across the road there was one no more than a hundred yards away . There was another on this side , a little further down . There were many more between here and Jarrodsville . Telephone poles lined the road . They reared tall and mocking . Their wires stretched out into infinity . Not a single strand of wire reached into the silent houses beside the red-clay road . There was nothing he could do but walk . And Jarrodsville was more than three miles away , down an old dirt road that the rain had turned into a quagmire . Marty faced east and started walking down the left side of the road . After he had proceeded a few feet , he paused and turned up the cuffs of his trousers , which were already damp and mud-caked . The viscous mud was ankle-deep , and in places great puddles spread across the road and reflected the murky light . As he approached the first farmhouse , thunder sounded behind him again , closer now and louder , like a steadily advancing drum corps . There were several people on the porch of the farmhouse . There was a very old man and a young woman and a brood of children ranging from toddlers to teen-agers . For just an instant he thought of appealing to them for help . Perhaps they had a car or truck and would drive him into town . Then he realized the utter futility of the idea . They were staring at him in the same blank and menacing way that the men outside the gate had stared . Even the eyes of the smallest children seemed malicious . On his side of the road there were two farm hands , well back in a field , leaning against a plow . They , too , stared at him . The drums of thunder were right behind him now . A foolish thought came into his head . He remembered a story he had read as a youth . It was probably one of Kipling's tales of the British Army . It concerned an officer who had been disgraced and drummed out . The steady roll of the drums had sounded behind him as he walked between the endless ranks of the men he had commanded , and each man about-faced and turned his back as the officer approached . Marty wished these poor farm people would turn their backs . The fencing by the roadside ended . Now the dirt highway was bordered on either side by a fairly deep drainage ditch , too broad to leap over unless you were an Olympic star . The day's rain had been added to the stagnant water . He was trapped on the road when he heard the sound of an approaching car . It was coming toward him . The car was now in sight . Marty's heart skipped a beat when he recognized it . It was the station wagon that had passed his cab on the road , the station wagon that had been parked at the Burch farm . Acey Squire's station wagon . It had headed back toward Jarrodsville . That had only been a ruse to lure him out on the deserted road . Now Acey and his friends were returning to seek him out . The station wagon came to a stop a couple of hundred feet in front of him , beside a fenced field . Then there was another sound . A second car was coming from the west , from the direction of Sanford's Run . It was the Ford that had been outside Burch's farm . Marty looked helplessly in both directions . It was a narrow road , barely wide enough for two cars to pass . He could not leave the road because of the water-filled drainage ditch . When the two cars were equidistant from him , the station wagon started up again and the Ford gathered speed . They bore down on him . There was nothing he could do except jump into the ditch . He jumped , and sank to his knees in muddy water . As the two cars roared by , there was a high-pitched eerie , nerve-shattering sound . Marty knew how the Union soldiers must have felt at Chancellorsville and Antietam and Gettysburg when the ragged gray ranks charged at them , screaming the wild banshee howl they called the Rebel yell . For moments he stood in water , shivering and gasping for breath . He had turned his ankle slightly , and it pained him . The cars , with their load of howling men , had disappeared in the distance . There had been two more cars parked at the farm , a Plymouth and a pickup truck . They would be coming for him next , bearing down on him from both directions . And then the station wagon and the Ford would seek him out again . He would be harassed repeatedly and would escape death by inches time after time , all the way to Jarrodsville . He still had three miles to go . Back East the more affluent juvenile delinquents , who could afford hyped-up autos instead of switch blades as lethal weapons , played this same game and called it `` Chicken '' . He could not go through the fields . That way was barred on both sides of the road by a high barbed-wire fence . He had to make for the section of road just ahead that was bordered by the rail fence , the section by the farmhouse . At least he could climb up on the fence when his tormenters roared by again . The Admassy place could not be far now . He would go in there , climb through the window , and at least be safe for a little while and able to rest . There was even a bare chance that the phone had not been disconnected . He did not dare climb back up to the road . He was deep in water , but at least they could not reach him there . He splashed on , mud sucking at his feet with each step , until he reached the end of the drainage ditch and the beginning of the fence that enclosed the farm . He climbed back to the road , and he felt utterly exhausted . He stood , panting , for a moment . And then he saw something that he had not seen before , and panic gripped him again . The fence , his only refuge when the metal death came roaring at him , was made of rails , all right , but the rails were protected by a thick screening of barbed wire that would rip his flesh if he pressed against it . He lurched on down the road despairingly , because there was no place else to go . He lost all sense of dignity . You could not stand on dignity when you were soaked and muddied and your life was at stake . Probably people were watching him from the porch or from behind the windows of this farmhouse , too , but he did not bother to look . He broke into a dogtrot , breathing heavily , streaming with sweat . He had to reach Admassy's place . It was his only sanctuary . The fences on both sides of the road bristled with the barbed wire . The fences stretched on endlessly . And then he heard them . And now he saw them . The Plymouth was coming at him from the east , the pickup truck from the west . They had timed it better this time . They would reach him at almost exactly the same instant . He stopped stone-still . If he backed against the fence , one of the cars would brush him as it passed , and he would be cruelly lacerated by the wire . He stumbled to the middle of the road and simply stood there , waiting for them , a perfect target . The cars must have had their gas pedals pushed down to the floor boards . They were coming on at reckless speed for such old vehicles . They thundered at him . He held his arms close to his sides and made himself as small as possible . When the Plymouth neared , it veered toward him and seemed about to run him down . He forced himself to stay frozen there . If he moved , he would be in the path of the other car . He thought the fender of the Plymouth brushed his jacket as it went by . In a fraction of a second the pickup truck hurtled by on the other side . The weird , insane sound of the Rebel yell reverberated again and echoed from the distant hills . He did not leave the middle of the road . He did not try to run . He trudged on , his aching eyes focused straight ahead . He was nearing the Admassy house . He was going to make it , he told himself . And then he heard a car coming from the east , and he felt as if he would break down and weep . `` Oh , no , not again '' , he said aloud . `` Not again so soon '' . There was a new sound , a sound as piercing as the Rebel yell , yet different . It was the sound of a siren . Now he saw that the approaching car was painted white , and he began to wave his arms frantically . It was the prowl car from the sheriff's office . The car drew up alongside him and stopped . `` Get in '' , Charley Estes said brusquely . He staggered into the back seat and lay back , fighting for breath . There was someone in front with the sheriff . It was Pete Holmes , the cabdriver . Pete turned around and said to Marty , `` I guess you think I'm a yellow-bellied hound . But there wasn't no use in me staying there . I couldn't fight a dozen or so of 'em . If I'd stayed , all that I'd have got was four punctured tires and one busted head . Why didn't you wait at the Burch house ? ? You must've known I'd gone to get the sheriff . I was lucky they let me go , I guess '' . The sheriff was occupied with maneuvering the car around in a very narrow space . When it was finally pointed east , he said , `` You should never have come out here alone . This is redneck country . Every man in every one of these houses is a Night Rider . Then he turned the telephone over to Rourke , and went into the bedroom to change his slippers for dry socks and shoes . Rourke was talking on the phone when he came back . `` About an hour , eh ? ? Are you positive '' ? ? He listened a moment and then said , `` Hold it '' . He turned his head and said , `` Alvarez will definitely be in a back room at the Jai Alai Club on South Beach within an hour . Want to try and meet him there '' ? ? Shayne looked at his watch . That wasn't too far from Fifth Street , and should allow him to make Scotty's Bar by midnight . He said with satisfaction , `` That's fine , Tim . I'll be there '' . Rourke confirmed the appointment over the phone and hung up . `` I don't know what you're getting into , Mike '' , he said unhappily . `` I hope to Christ . '' Shayne said briskly , `` Grab another drink if you want it . We've got one other call to make before I meet Alvarez '' . `` Where '' ? ? `` It's out in the Northeast section . Have you got my car here '' ? ? `` It's parked in front '' . Rourke hastily slopped whiskey into his glass on top of half-melted ice-cubes . `` I'd better keep on driving yours '' , Shayne decided , `` because I'll be going on over to the Beach . I can drop you back here to pick mine up '' . He went to a closet to get a light jacket , and took his hat from beside the door . Timothy Rourke gulped down the whiskey hastily and joined him , asking , `` Who are we going to call on in the Northeast section '' ? ? `` A lady . That is , maybe not too much of a lady . At least , I want to find out whether she's home yet or not '' . He opened the door and followed Rourke out . In Rourke's car , Shayne drove east to Biscayne Boulevard and north toward Felice Perrin's address which had been given to him by the Peralta governess . As he drove , he filled in Timothy Rourke briefly on the events of the evening after leaving the reporter to go to the Peralta house , and on his own surmises . `` I want to be in Scotty's Bar at midnight when Marsha makes her phone call there '' , he ended grimly . `` I don't know whether that threatening letter of hers has anything to do with this situation or not , but I want to see who takes the call '' . `` This deal at Las Putas Buenas where the two knife-men jumped you '' , said Rourke with interest , `` that sounds like it was set up with malice aforethought by the luscious Mrs. Peralta , doesn't it '' ? ? `` It does '' , Shayne grunted sourly , still able to taste her mouth on his in the Green Jungle parking lot . `` That story of hers about an unsigned note directing her to be there tonight sounds completely phony . If it was designed to put me on the spot , it would have to have been written before Peralta ever called me in on the case '' . `` Do you think Laura did have the counterfeit bracelet made without her husband's knowledge '' ? ? `` I haven't the faintest idea . I think her husband strongly suspects so , and that's why he called me in on the thing in direct defiance of his confederates and almost certainly without telling them why he was doing so . Isn't this Felice's street '' ? ? Shayne asked , peering ahead at the partially obscured street sign . Rourke could see it better out the right-hand side , and he said , `` yes . Turn to the left , I think , for that number you gave me . Not more than a block or so '' . Shayne got in the left-hand lane and cut across the Boulevard divider . There was a small , neon-lighted restaurant and cocktail lounge on the southeast corner of the intersection as he turned into the quiet , palm-lined street where most of the houses on both sides were older two-story mansions , now cut up into furnished rooms and housekeeping apartments . Shayne drove westward from the Boulevard slowly , letting Rourke crane his head out the window and watch for street numbers . A single automobile was parked half-way up the block on the left-hand side . Shayne noted idly that it carried Miami Beach license plates as he approached , and then saw the flare of a match in the front seat as they passed , indicating that it was occupied . He turned to see the briefly-illumed faces of two men in the parked car just as Rourke said , `` It's the next house , Mike . On the right '' . Instead of pulling into the curb , Shayne increased his speed slightly to the corner where he swung left . He went around the corner and parked , turning off his lights and motor . `` I told you , Mike '' , said Rourke in an aggrieved voice . `` It was back there . '' Shayne said , `` I know it was , Tim '' . His voice was chilling and cold . `` Did you see the car parked across the street '' ? ? `` I didn't notice it . I was watching for numbers . '' `` It has a Beach license , Tim . Two men in the front seat . I got a quick look at their faces as we went past . Unless I'm crazy as hell , they're two of Painter's dicks . A couple named Harris and Geely . Those names mean anything to you '' ? ? `` Wait a minute , Mike . In Painter's office this evening . '' Shayne nodded grimly . `` The pair whom Petey is officially commending for slapping me around and pulling me in '' . `` What are they doing here '' ? ? `` A stake-out , I suppose . On Felice Perrin . Maybe with specific orders to see that I don't make contact with her . I'm not positive , Tim . I may be wrong . I'll slide out and walk around the block back to the cocktail lounge on Biscayne . You drive on and circle back and pull up beside them parked there . You're a reporter , and you're looking for Miss Perrin to interview her . Make them show their hands . If they are Beach cops on a stake-out , they'll admit it to a reporter . They've got no official standing on this side of the Bay . As soon as you find out if they are Geely and Harris , come on around to the lounge where I'll be waiting '' . Shayne opened the door on his side and stepped out . Timothy Rourke groaned dismally as he slid under the wheel . `` The things you talk me into , Mike . '' Shayne chuckled . `` How often do they add up to headlines ? ? You should complain '' . He crossed the street and walked swiftly southward to circle back to the Boulevard and north a block to the open restaurant . He was standing at the end of the bar enjoying a slug of cognac when Rourke came in six or eight minutes later . The reporter nodded as he moved up beside him at the bar . Shayne told the bartender , `` Bourbon and water '' , and Rourke told him , `` It's those two , all right . Harris and Geely . I made them show me their identification before I could be persuaded not to call on Felice Perrin '' . Shayne said happily , `` I've got it all worked out , Tim . Take your time with your drink . I'll beat it . In exactly three minutes , go in that phone booth behind you and call Police Headquarters . Be excited and don't identify yourself . Just say that a couple of drunks are having a hell of a fight down the street , and they better send a patrol car . Then hang up fast and come walking on down to the Perrin address . I'll be waiting for you there '' . The bartender brought Rourke's drink and Shayne laid a twenty-dollar bill on the bar . He said in a low voice , `` I've got a date with a lady , Mister . Will that pay for a pint I can take with me . You know how it is '' , he added with a conspiratorial wink . `` Candy is dandy , but liquor is quicker and you don't have any candy for sale here anyhow '' . `` We sure don't '' . The bartender winked back at him and palmed the bill . He turned away and returned in a moment with a pint of brandy in a small paper sack which he slid over the counter to Shayne . As the detective slid it into his pocket , Rourke asked sadly , `` What in hell are you going to do , Mike '' ? ? `` Make a couple of punk detectives named Geely and Harris wish to God they'd stayed out of my way this afternoon . Three minutes , Tim '' . Shayne strode out blithely , and Rourke checked his watch and sipped his drink , getting a dime ready to make the telephone call to the police . Outside , Shayne hesitated when he saw that Rourke had parked his coupe directly in front of the bar headed south . He walked over to the right-hand door , opened it and got the reloaded automatic out of the glove compartment and put it in his hip pocket . He hoped he wouldn't be forced to use it in taking care of the Beach detectives , but its weight was comforting at his hip . On this side of the Bay , Miami Beach cops had no more legal rights than any ordinary citizen , and Shayne's pistol permit was just as good as theirs . He went swiftly up the sidewalk toward the parked car with the two Beach detectives in the front seat . He tugged the brim of his hat low as he approached , stepped out into the street just behind the car and strode around to the right-hand side . The big , paunchy man named Geely was on that side , half-turned in the seat toward his hatchet-faced companion so that his back partially rested against the closed door . Shayne turned the handle and jerked the door open before either of the men were quite aware of his presence in the night . Geely grunted and slid partly out , and Shayne's left arm snaked in around his neck to help him , while he set himself solidly on the roadway and swung his right fist to the big , gum-chewing jaw before Geely could straighten up . Shayne stepped back to let him slump to the ground , and then dived over him through the open door into Harris who was cursing loudly and trying to drag a gun from a shoulder holster , somewhat impeded by the steering wheel . Shayne locked his big hands around Harris' thin neck and dragged him out over the seat into the roadway . He hit him once on the sharp point of his chin and felt the body go limp . He dropped him into the street a couple of feet away from Geely's recumbent figure and stared down at both of them for a moment before kicking the big man lightly in the side . He didn't stir . They were both breathing heavily , out cold , and Shayne didn't think either of them had recognized him or could describe him . He got the pint of liquor out of his pocket and unscrewed the top , sprinkled the pungent stuff liberally over both men , and then tossed the open bottle in on the front seat . He turned , then , to look toward the lighted Boulevard , and saw Rourke's tall , emaciated figure come out of the lounge and hurriedly start to angle across the street toward the opposite side . Shayne strolled across to intercept the reporter in front of the two-story house where Felice Perrin lived , and asked casually , `` Get the police okay '' ? ? `` Sure . Said they'd have a patrol car here fast . Let's get inside . What happened with you '' ? ? `` Why the two damned fools got all excited when they saw the bottle , and knocked each other out cold '' , Shayne said good-humoredly . `` They'll have fun explaining that to the Miami cops . Got no business over here on a stake-out anyway '' . They went up onto a front porch and into a small hallway where a dim bulb burned high in the ceiling . A row of mailboxes along the wall had numbers and names on them . Shayne found one marked Perrin Aj . The stairway on the right was dark , but there was a wall-switch at the bottom which lighted another dim bulb at the top , and they went up . There were two front rooms , both dark behind their transoms , and there was no sound or light in the entire house to indicate that any of the occupants were awake . Eight , nine steps above him , Roberts had paused . Mickey paused with him , waiting , no longer impatient , trying now to think it out , do a little planning . He looked down over the banister at the hotel desk , with the telephone and pen set . If I could call in , they could check the story while we were on our way . I wouldn't have to tell them I had Roberts -- Then he heard it , like a muffled thud , felt a subtle change in air pressure . He glanced up in time to see Roberts hurtling down on him from above , literally flying through the air , his bloody face twisted . Mickey tried to flatten against the banister , gripped it with one hand , but Roberts' full weight struck him at that moment in the groin . He gasped for air and the impact tore his hand from the rail . He tumbled with Roberts , helpless and in agony , over and over , down the steps . By a wrenching effort , he managed to hunch and draw in , to take the final fall on his back and shoulders rather than his head . He was fuzzy in his mind and , for a moment , helpless on the lobby floor , but he was conscious , and free of the weight of Roberts' body . When his vision cleared he saw the taller one scrambling upward , reaching . Mickey was on his knees when Roberts turned on the stairs and the razor flashed in his hand . He felt his empty pocket and knew that Roberts had retrieved the only weapon at hand . Mickey's eyes fixed on the other's feet , which would first betray the moment and direction of an attack . He rose stiffly , forcing his knees to lock . The knifelike pain in his groin nearly brought him down again . He made himself back off slowly , his eyes wary on Roberts , who now had no more to lose than he . The pain dulled as he moved , and he steadied inside . After a moment he extended one hand , the fingers curled . `` Come on '' , he said . `` You want to be that big a fool -- I was hoping for this '' . Roberts brushed at his eyes with his free hand and started down the steps . He held the razor well out to one side . He was invulnerable to attack , but he could be handled , Mickey knew , if he could be brought to make the first move . They were eight feet apart when Roberts cleared the last step . Mickey waited with slack arms . `` Any time , Roberts '' , he said . `` Or would it be easier if I put my hands in my pockets '' ? ? The taunt was lost on Roberts . He advanced slowly , directly , giving no hint of a feint to either side . He was just short of arm's reach when he stopped . Mickey backed off two steps , forcing him to come on again . There was a fixed grin on Roberts' face , made hideous by the swollen nose and the smeared blood . Mickey backed off again and Roberts hesitated , then came along . They moved in a series of rhythmic fits and starts , a macabre dance -- two steps back , two steps forward , two steps back . Mickey felt his shoulders come up against the wall beside the heavy slab front door . This was going to be it now , any second , and what he had to remember was to keep his eye on the razor , no matter what , even if Roberts should feint with a kick to the groin , the deadly hand was his exclusive concern . The kick came , sudden and vicious but short . Mickey's guts twisted with the effort , but he kept his eye on the weapon . It moved in a silver arc toward his throat , then veered downward . He hunched his left shoulder into it and slashed at Roberts' forearm with his own , felt the blade slide off his sleeve . Before Roberts could move inside to cut upward toward his face , he slammed his right fist into Roberts' belly . Roberts sagged and slashed at him wildly . Ducking , Mickey tripped and fell to one side , landing heavily on the wood floor . Then Roberts was on him , gasping for breath and for a couple of seconds Mickey lost sight of the blade . He felt it rip at the side of his jacket and a momentary sting under his left ribs . He got a knee up into Roberts' belly , used both hands and heaved him clear , then scrambled to his feet . They were in the center of the lobby now . Still clutching the razor , Roberts came up into a crouch , shaking his head . When he charged Mickey was ready . He hit Roberts with his left fist in the ribs and the razor cut toward him feebly , then wobbled in mid-air . With his right fist , and nearly all his weight behind it , he smashed at the bloodstained face . Roberts careened backward , his back arched , fought for balance and , failing , stumbled against the newel post at the foot of the stairs . The sound of his head striking the solid wood was an ultimate , sudden-end sound . He fell on his side across the lowest step , rolled over once , then lay still . Mickey found himself leaning against the desk , with stiff hands , panting for breath . After a minute he went to Roberts , looked at one of his eyes and felt for a pulse . He couldn't feel any . Roberts appeared to be dead ; ; if not yet , then soon , very soon . Suddenly it was cold in the lobby . 12 It seemed to him that a long time had passed before he decided what to do . Actually it was no more than eight or ten minutes , and the sum of his reasoning came to this : There's no way to take him in now and keep those other two -- Wister and the one who hired the two of them -- from finding out about Roberts and lamming out . The local law here would hold me till they check clear back home , and maybe more than that . They would have to . By then they could never catch up with the others . There's no other way ; ; I'll have to do it myself . He looked at where Roberts lay sprawled on the step . Mickey was sure now he was dead . One thing , he thought , nobody knows about it yet . Only me . He climbed the stairs , went into Roberts' room , found a suitcase and packed as much into it as he could . He left a few things . It didn't have to be perfect . Roberts was a wastrel . Walking away on impulse , he might logically leave behind what it was inconvenient to carry . When he had closed the suitcase he found a rag and moved about the room , wiping carefully everything he might have touched . It took him nearly an hour . He went to the room he had rented and got into his overcoat . He left the rest of his things and returned to the lobby . He set Roberts' suitcase near the front door , went outside and walked back to the garage . He was mildly surprised to find it was snowing . It snowed softly , silently , an undulating interruption of his vision against the night sky . He could feel it on his face and in his hair . He found the key to the Jeep , got it started and warmed it up for five minutes . Then he backed out and swung around to the front drive . He went into the hotel and searched till he found the razor . He put it in his own pocket for safekeeping . He took the suitcase out to the Jeep and put it in the front seat . Then he went back for Roberts . The body was heavier than he had anticipated . He got it onto his shoulder after some work and carried it outside and down to the Jeep . He dumped it into the back and made sure it wouldn't roll out , then returned to the porch and closed the front door , making sure it was unlocked . He drove carefully in the direction of the brief tour they had taken earlier . It snowed continuously , but quietly , evenly . When he reached the dip in the woods , he saw that already the earlier ruts were barely discernible . The Jeep fought its way through the low spot and got onto higher ground . He drove in low gear to the fork in the road and swung as close as possible to the entrance to the abandoned mine . He parked facing it and left the headlights on , but when he started into the tunnel with the suitcase , he found the illumination extended no farther than half a dozen feet into the passage . He went back and got the flashlight , returned to the tunnel and carried the suitcase to the edge of the pit he had found earlier . He tossed the bag into the pit and watched dry dust spray up around it . When the dust settled , he went back to the Jeep and carefully worked Roberts' body onto his shoulder . It wasn't like carrying the suitcase . The soft snow was deceitful underfoot . Twice he nearly fell . Inside the passage , he had to work his way over the fallen timber and nearly collapsed under his clumsy burden . By the time he reached the edge of the pit he was panting and his shoulder and back ached under the drag of the dead weight . He stood looking down for a few seconds , then backed up two or three paces from the edge . There was too much weight casually to toss it away . He could feel himself falling in with it and being unable to get out . It would be a bad place to die . It was a bad place for Roberts to wind up , but Roberts had asked for it . It was too late to worry about that . He knelt slowly and dumped the corpse onto the floor of the tunnel . It was a relief to get rid of the weight . He was shaking with tension and it took him a couple of minutes to get his breath and settle down . Then he got on his knees and rolled Roberts' body toward the edge . It hung momentarily on the point of dropping off . He gave it a strong push , heard it slide , then tumble dryly into the hole . He got to his feet and threw the flashlight beam into the pit . The body lay in an awkward sprawl twelve or fifteen feet below the level of the tunnel floor . Deep enough , he decided . There was little chance anyone would enter this shaft during the winter . The external signs of his approach to it would be covered by the snow , probably by the next day . It wasn't cold enough in the tunnel to preserve the body intact . By spring it would be a skeleton . He made his way back to the Jeep . He had started to back into the turn when he remembered the razor in his pocket . He climbed down , went back into the tunnel and tossed the razor into the pit . It landed on Roberts' sprawled right thigh , poised precariously , then slid off to the ground . He went back once more to the Jeep and started the short drive to the hotel . In the garage he checked the Jeep for signs of the use he had made of it . There were stains here and there and he cleaned them off , using an oiled rag he found on a nail . He wiped the steering wheel and all the places he might have touched the Jeep . He replaced the flashlight where it had been stowed , got into his own car and backed it out of the garage . There were tire marks where it had been , but they were overlapped by others and on the dusty floor would not be noticeable except under close scrutiny . Liz Peabody , he thought , might spend some time grieving for her lost lover , but he doubted that she would launch an investigation . He judged her to be a woman of some pride , though not much sense . Still she would probably have sense enough not to call in the local sheriff to find her boy friend who , apparently , had run away . He put in a call to Cunningham from his hotel room . The maid answered and he decided Nancy must be at work . Jeb cautioned him not to be too hopeful and then , ignoring his own advice , said excitedly , `` But it does sound good . A woman named Lisa who tells nobody anything about herself . That courtyard picture with the same initials '' . `` I'm not exactly jumping up and down with enthusiasm . I'll call you in a day or so '' . On the highway he relaxed and enjoyed the drive over Lake Pontchartrain and along the coast . Gulf Springs was ten miles inland -- more of a quaint old coast town than those along the beach made garish by tourist attractions . He checked into a motel and drove downtown . The courthouse was a white-stucco building minus the customary dome . Instead of the usual straggling privet hedges and patches of bare dirt in most small-town squares , the building was hemmed in by a semitropical growth of camellias and azaleas and a smooth lawn the improbably bright-green shade of florist's grass . He figured his best bet was a call on the sheriff . A clerk in the outer office took him in to Sheriff Carruthers , a big , paunchy man with thick , white hair and a voice with a senatorial resonance which suggested he should be running for higher office . Seated in front of the desk , Hank said , `` I'm looking for some information with very little to go on , Sheriff '' . He explained the background of the case , ending with the tenuous clue which had brought him to Gulf Springs . The sheriff's swivel chair tilted back . `` So you're looking for a woman who married a man who might have lived here a year ago and might have been poisoned . If there was such a person , I'm afraid she got away with it . Pity we don't know more about him . I think the best bet is to go through the society columns of last year and see if any of the grooms match with the obituaries a little later . It'll be a tedious job , but if you want to try it , the old newspaper files are in the basement here in the county supervisor's office '' . `` Maybe the society editor would remember a good-looking out-of-town bride '' . `` That's an idea . Mrs. Calhoun has been society editor here for twenty-five years . The editor says that marriages may be made in heaven , but weddings are made in Mrs. Calhoun's columns . She's the one who decides which wedding is to get the lead space in the Sunday paper and all that '' . He smiled . `` Once , when the editor was just out of the hospital from a gallstone operation , Mrs. Calhoun and the mother of the bride went out to his house and fought it out beside his bed . She'd be sure to remember any bride who was vague about background . She'd have made a great scientist dedicated to tracking down heredity and environment . She'd also remember if the groom died later '' . He stood up . `` I wish you good luck , but please don't dig up too tough a case for me this close to election . If you find out anything , come on back here and we'll get started on it '' . Tracking down Mrs. Calhoun was like trying to catch up with Paul Revere between Lexington and Concord . It turned out that she also sold real estate , cosmetics , and hospital insurance . The wearying trek stretched into the afternoon -- from newspaper plant to insurance office to her house and back to the newspaper , where he found her at five o'clock . She was a large woman with a frizzled gray poodle cut and a pencil clamped like a bit between her teeth while she hunted and pecked on an old typewriter . It took a couple of minutes to run through her various businesses and get down to the one he wanted . `` Last year ? ? Well , I do remember one . From Baton Rouge . Married a man named Vincent Black . I remember her because she didn't want her picture in the paper . First bride like that I've seen in twenty-five years '' . `` What reason did she give '' ? ? `` Said she had a breaking-out on her face -- some sort of allergy -- and none of her old pictures was good enough . I didn't see her till several days later at the wedding , and her face looked like it had never had a blemish on it . But , of course , you couldn't see too well through the veil '' . `` Was her name Lisa Carmody '' ? ? `` Now how in hell would I remember that '' ? ? `` Never mind . I can look it up . Do they still live here '' ? ? `` I think they moved away shortly after they were married . He was a salesman for something or other and must have been transferred . I'm sure it'll be in the files . We usually run a social note when somebody moves away '' . He stood up and thanked her . `` Have they inherited some money or something '' ? ? She asked with a reportorial gleam in her eye . He said vaguely , `` Well , it is a little legal matter , but nothing like that '' . He hurried across to the courthouse and caught the sheriff just as he was leaving . `` Sounds like what you're after '' , he said when Hank had finished . `` Come on , let's hurry down before they lock up for the day '' . In the basement the sheriff took him to a small , dingy office occupied by a tall , thin man informal in rolled-up shirt sleeves . `` Mr. Ferrell Hirey Lindsay , chairman of the board of supervisors . Mr. Ferrell is a private detective , Hirey . Wants to look up something in the newspaper files , so don't lock him in here '' . `` Sure '' , said Hirey . `` I'll just leave the door open . It latches when you close it , so stay as long as you like '' . Carruthers crossed the room to a metal door with an open grillework in the top half . He pulled it open . `` Now don't shut this door . It won't open from inside . Before we built the new jail , we used to keep prisoners in here overnight sometimes when the old jail got too crowded . Hirey treats himself a lot better than we do prisoners . They were a sight more comfortable than the ones in the jail with the cold air from Hirey's air conditioner coming through the grille '' . He walked past the sheriff into a windowless room with shelves full of big , leather-bound volumes from floor to ceiling all around the walls . A metal table and four chairs stood in the center . `` They're all here , back to 1865 '' , Carruthers told him . `` It's all right to smoke , but make sure your cigarettes are out before you leave . And , of course , you know not to take clippings '' . `` I'll leave the air conditioner on for you , Mr. Ferrell '' , said Hirey . `` Don't forget to turn it off and close the door good so it'll latch '' . Hank thanked them and promised to observe the rules . When they had gone , he stood for a minute breathing in the mustiness of old paper and leather which the busily thrumming air conditioner couldn't quite dispel . Chapter fourteen In a tour around the stacks , he found that the earliest volumes began on the left and progressed clockwise around the room . An old weakness for burrowing in records rose up to tempt him . It was , indeed , all here -- almost a century . From reconstruction to moon rockets . But he pulled away from the irrelevant old volumes and walked around to the newer ones . Last year's volume was at the top a couple of inches below the ceiling . Near it was a metal ladder on casters attached to the top shelf . He pulled it over , climbed up , and lifted out the big volume , almost losing his balance from the weight of it . He staggered over and dropped it on the table . Since Mrs. Calhoun remembered only that the marriage had been in the spring , he started to plod through several months . He tried to turn right to the society page in each one , but interesting stories kept cropping up to distract him . At last he found it in the paper of April 2 . It told him little more than Mrs. Calhoun had remembered , stating that it had been a small , modest wedding compared to some of the others . There was a marked contrast in the amount of information on bride and groom . Mr. Black's life was an open book , so to speak , from his birth in Jackson , Mississippi , through his basketball-playing days at L.S.U. and his attainment of a B.A. degree , which had presumably prepared him for his career as district sales manager for Peerless Business Machines . The one line on the bride said she was Miss Lisa Carmody from Baton Rouge . No mention of New Orleans . Hank was beginning to feel sharp concern for Mr. Black . If Mrs. Black was who he thought she was , Mr. Black's Peerless selling days might well be over . Now for their exodus from Gulf Springs . This time the search took twice as long , cutting down on his extra reading , for he had to pick through several columns of one- and two-line social notes in each issue . He found it in the edition of May 15 . The item said Mr. and Mrs. Black had moved to Jackson , his home town -- so the lovely Lisa had been with him a year ago . Next on his program was a call to the Jackson office of Peerless Business Machines to find out if Vincent Black was still with them -- or , more specifically , still with us . He glanced at his watch , saw it was only seven , and decided to indulge his weakness now . For the next hour he scrambled happily up and down the ladder , sharing the excitement of reporters who had seen McKinley's assassination , the Iroquois Theater fire in Chicago , and the Hall-Mills trial . In the middle of the stock market crash , he heard a slight noise in the outer office . He turned around , saw nothing , and decided it must be a mouse . Something else distracted him , yet there was no sound , only tomblike silence . Then he knew it was not sound , but lack of it . The air conditioner was no longer running . He jumped up and turned around to see the metal door closing . It clanged shut as he sprang toward it . He pressed his face against the grille . `` Who's there '' ? ? The light shining through the grille dimly illumined the office beyond -- enough for him to see there was no one there . Then he heard the outer door closing . `` Hey , come back '' , he shouted . He thought it must be some damn janitor or cleaning woman puttering around , figuring that Hirey had gone off and forgotten to turn off everything and lock up . Then the faint beginnings of fear stirred in his mind . Unless he was stone-blind , the person who'd just left couldn't have missed seeing Hank through the open door of the brightly lighted room . And even if he'd somehow missed seeing him , he wouldn't have gone off and left the light on and door open in the file room . Whoever it was had meant to shut him up in here , had followed him and waited till the courthouse and square were deserted . But why ? ? To search his room at the motel ? ? To come back later and kill him after the stores had closed around the square and everybody had left ? ? No , they could kill him just as easy right now . Nobody could hear what was going on in this underground vault . Then he heard it and smelled it -- the steady hissing , the dread , familiar pungency of gas escaping . It must be coming from an upright heater against the far wall in the supervisors' office . Until now , Lilac Gaylor and Lila Kingsley had been like an anagram which he could unscramble at his own pace and choosing . Except for those minutes in her room , he had lost touch with her as a reality . Gaylor's obsession and Cunningham's chimera-chasing reminiscences had mesmerized him into thinking of Lila and Lilac , separately or together , as a legend . They kept drifting apart and merging again in his mind like some minute form of life on a microscope slide . `` Well '' -- said Mr. Skyros . `` I take a little time to think it over '' . It was awkward : very awkward . There would be all the nuisance of contacting someone else to take over . Someone reasonably trustworthy . And Angie would hear about it . And Angie knew -- `` Time '' , said Angie , and he smiled very sweet and slow at Mr. Skyros . `` Not too much time , because I'll be needing some more myself pretty much right away . And I done favors for you , big favor not so long back , didn't I , and I'm right here to take on where Pretty left off . No trouble . I don't want no trouble , you don't want no trouble , nobody wants trouble , Mr. Skyros '' . Dear heaven , no , thought Mr. Skyros , turning away as another man came in . He straightened his tie at the mirror with a shaking hand ; ; the genial smile seemed painted on his face . Angie knew -- Speak of dangerous information ! ! Angie knew too much entirely already . Really he had Mr. Skyros at bay `` Big favor I done you . Acourse there's this deal o' Denny's -- and Jackie's -- kinda hangin' fire , ain't it , maybe you've been kinda worryin' over that . And can't say I blame you '' , said Angie thoughtfully . `` This deal with the ace o' spades . Anything to do with an ace o' spades , bad luck '' . Ace of spades -- a widow , that was what they called a widow , these low-class crooks remembered Mr. Skyros distractedly . All about that Angie knew , too . When things got a little out of hand , they very rapidly got a lot out of hand -- it seemed to be a general rule . All just by chance , and in a way tracing back to poor Frank , all of it , because naturally -- brothers , living together -- and Angie -- Mr. Skyros did not at all like the look on Angelo's regular-featured , almost girlishly good-looking face -- or indeed anything about Angelo . Mr. Skyros was not a man who thought very much about moral principles ; ; he found money much more interesting ; ; but all the same he thought now , uneasily , of the way in which Angelo earned his living -- and paid for his own stuff -- and eyed the soft smile , and the spaniel-like dark eyes , and he felt a little ill . `` Look , my friend '' , he said , `` in my life I learn , how is it the proverb says , better an ounce of prevention to a pound of cure . I stay in business so long because I'm careful . Two weeks , a month , we talk it over again , and maybe if nothing happens meanwhile to say the cops know this and that , then we make a little deal , isn't it '' ? ? `` That's a long while '' , said Angie . `` I tell you , you want to leave it that way , I don't fool around with it . I go over to Castro and get fixed up there . I can't wait no two weeks '' . And Mr. Skyros didn't like Angie , but what with Prettyman and three of his boys inside , and not likely to come out -- And Angie such a valuable salesman , Prettyman said -- All the nuisance and danger of getting in touch with practically a whole new bunch of boys -- Why did everything have to happen at once ? ? Denny said stupidly , `` Why , you ain't turning Angie down , are you , Mr. Skyros ? ? I mean , we all figured -- I guess anybody'd figure -- Angie '' -- Angelo gave him an affectionate smile . `` Mr. Skyros too smart a fellow want to get rid of me '' , he said . `` It's O.K. , Denny , everything's O.K. Ain't it , Mr. Skyros '' ? ? Oh , God , the name repeated over and over , anybody to hear -- Not being a fool , Mr. Skyros knew why . But aside from everything else , it would scarcely be pleasant to have dealings with one who was nominally an underling and actually held -- you could say -- the whip hand . And all because of Domokous ! ! If Mr. Skyros had dreamed of all the trouble that young man would eventually cause -- Of course , there was another factor . Angie worth his weight in gold right now , but these users , they sometimes went down fast . Who knew , Angie might not last long . The sweat broke out on Mr. Skyros' forehead as he realized he had been actually thinking -- hoping -- planning -- perhaps -- Good God above , had not Domokous been enough ? ? He patted Angelo's thin shoulder paternally . `` Now you don't want to go talking that way '' , he said . `` Sure , sure , you're the one take over for Pretty , soon as I get the supply , get started up again , isn't it ? ? You don't need worry , Angelo . I tell you , I know how it is with you , my friend , I sympathize , and I'll make it a special point -- a special favor -- get in touch , and get some stuff just for you . I don't know if I can manage it tonight or tomorrow , but I'll try my best , my friend . You see , you got to remember , we all got schedules , like any business ! ! My man , he won't be around a little while , he just fixed me up with this stuff they took out of the Elite . It's awkward , you see that , isn't it '' ? ? `` Well , that's your business , Mr. Skyros '' , said Angie , and his dreamy eyes moved past Mr. Skyros' shoulder to gaze vaguely out the ground-glass window . `` I appreciate it , you do that . Sure . We don't none of us want no trouble . I'm in a room over the Golden Club on San Pedro , you just ask for me there , you want see me . Or maybe I call you -- tonight ? ? About nine o'clock , I call and see if you got any . A couple decks for me , Mr. Skyros -- and ten-twelve to sell , see , I like to have a little ready cash '' . `` Oh , now , I don't know about that much '' , said Mr. Skyros . `` And you know , Angelo , Pretty , he always keeps it a strict cash basis , like they say '' -- `` Sure '' , said Angie . `` Sure , Mr. Skyros . Fifty a throw , that the deal ? ? Sure . I bring you the cash , say five hundred for ten decks . Never mind how much I cut it , how much I get '' , and he smiled his sleepy smile again . `` Standard deal , Mr. Skyros . You go 'n' have a look round for it '' . `` I do my best '' , said Mr. Skyros earnestly , `` just for you , my friend . This is awkward for everybody , isn't it , we all got to put up with inconvenience sometimes . But I do my best for you '' . He got out of there in a hurry , brushing past another man in the door , mopping his brow . The expedient thing -- yes , very true , one must make do as one could , in some situations . It could all be straightened out later . Not very much later , but when things had settled down a little . After this deal with the Bouvardier woman went through . An ace of spades . He was not a superstitious man , but he felt perhaps there was a little something in that , indeed . He rather wished he had never got into the business , and still -- scarcely to be resisted , a nice little profit with not much work involved , easy money Katya Roslev , who would be Katharine Ross so very soon now , rang up her first sale of the day and counted back the change . She did not notice that the customer seized her purchase and turned away without a smile or a word of thanks . Usually she marked the few who did thank you , you didn't get that kind much in a place like this : and she played a little game with herself , seeing how downright rude she could act to the others , before they'd take offense , threaten to call the manager . Funny how seldom they did : used to it , probably . The kind who came into a cheap store like this ! ! Grab , snatch , I saw that first ! ! And , Here , I'll take this , I was before her , you wait on me now or I don't bother with it , see ! ! This kind of place She'd be through here , just no time at all -- leave this kind of thing 'way behind . Off at noon , and she'd never come back . Never have to . Money -- a lot of money , enough . She'd be smart about it , get him to give it to her in little bills so's nobody would suspect -- maybe couldn't get it until Monday account of that , the banks -- But that wasn't really long to wait . Not when she'd waited so long already . No need say anything at all to the old woman . She had it all planned out , how she'd do . She'd say she didn't feel good on Sunday , couldn't go to church -- there'd be a little argument , but she could be stubborn -- and when the old woman had gone , quick pack the things she'd need to take , all but the dress she'd wear Monday , and take the bag down to that place in the station where you could put things in a locker overnight , for a dime . Then on Monday morning -- or it might have to be Tuesday -- get up and leave just the usual time , and last thing , put the money in an envelope under the old woman's purse there in the drawer . She wouldn't be going to get that for an hour or so after Katya had left , go do the daily shopping . No need leave a note with it , either -- or maybe just something like , Don't worry about me , I'm going away to make a better life . A better life . Escape . It wasn't as if she wanted much . She didn't mind working hard , not as if she figured to do anything wrong to live easy and soft -- all she wanted was a chance , where she wasn't marked as what she was . To be Katharine Ross , and work in a nicer shop somewhere , at a little more money so she could have prettier clothes , and learn ladies' manners and all like that , and get to know different people than up to now , not just the ones like her here , with foreign-sounding names , the ones went to the same church and -- Different place , different job , different people , she'd be all different too . Prettier , she'd do her hair another way ; ; smarter , and wear different kinds of clothes -- she'd be Katharine Ross , just what that sounded like . `` You've give me the wrong change '' , said the customer sharply . `` Think I can't count '' ? ? Katya made up the amount in indifferent silence . She was listening to other voices , out of the future . Some of those vaguely-imagined new , different people . Oh , Katharine's awfully nice , and pretty too , I like Katharine -- Let's ask Katharine to go with us , she's always lots of fun -- Katharine -- Soon , very soon now sixteen Mendoza didn't wake until nearly nine-thirty . It was going to be another hot day ; ; already the thermometer stood close to ninety . Alison was still sound asleep ; ; he made fresh coffee and searched through all the desk drawers for more cigarettes before thinking of her handbag , and found a crumpled stray cigarette at its bottom , which tasted peculiarly of face powder . He left a note propped on the desk asking her to call him sometime today , and drove home . After he'd got out fresh liver for Bast , he paused to look at her crouched daintily over her dish . Surely she was just a trifle fatter around the middle ? ? He seemed to remember reading somewhere that Abyssinians had large litters , and suffered a dismaying vision of the apartment overrun with a dozen kittens . `` Y que sigue despues ? ? -- What then '' ? ? He asked her severely . `` A lot of people are so peculiar that they don't like cats , it's not the easiest thing in the world to find good homes for kittens -- and , damn it , you know very well if I have them around long , impossible to give them away ! ! And I suppose now that you've finally grown up , if a little late , you'd go on producing kittens every six months or so . Yes , well , it's a pity to spoil your girlish figure -- which all those kittens would do anyway -- but I think when you've raised these we'll just have the vet fix it so there won't be any more . I wonder if the Carters would take one . And it's no good looking at me like that '' , as she wound affectionately around his ankles . Maude's long nose unexpectedly wrinkled up . `` Happened to be in the hall ! ! Happened to hear you quarrel about her ! ! Oh , well , you can't really blame Lolotte . She lost her beau to you '' . But she was talking of Emile when she saw the black line of the open door ; ; Sarah remembered it clearly . Maude went on . `` I've got to get busy . Miss Celie's taken to her bed , with the door locked . She opened it an inch and poked out the keys for me to give you . Here '' -- She thrust a bundle of keys strung on a thick red cord into Sarah's hand . `` Not that there's much use in locking up the smokehouse and the storehouse now . Drink your coffee '' -- coffee . `` It's -- cold '' . Maude suddenly looked quite capable of pouring it down her throat . `` I don't want it '' , Sarah said , firmly . `` Oh . Well -- I'll take it down with me as I go '' . Maude swooped up the cup and hiked up her top hoop as if about to take off with a racing start . At the door she turned back , her Roman nose looking very long now and satiric . `` I forgot . Ben and Lucien have gone after them . It's just like that book your Northern friend wrote -- except there aren't any ice floes to cross and no bloodhounds '' . `` I don't know Mrs. Stowe . What can they do if they find them '' ? ? `` They can't do anything . It's silly , childish , running after them like that . I told Ben so . But of course the paterollers won't be of any help , not with everything so upset and that Yankee cavalry outfit they say is running around , God knows where '' . She had swished away , she had been gone for a long time probably when Sarah suddenly realized that she ought to stop her , pour out the coffee , so no one would drink it . But then the so-called coffee was bad enough at best , cold it was all but undrinkable -- especially that cup ! ! She was deeply , horribly sure that Lucien had filled it with opium . She had quarreled with Lucien , she had resisted his demands for money -- and if she died , by the provisions of her marriage contract , Lucien would inherit legally not only the immediate sum of gold under the floorboards in the office , but later , when the war was over , her father's entire estate . She felt cold and hot , sticky and chilly at the same time . Now wait a minute , she told herself , think about it ; ; Lucien is not the only person in this house who could have put opium in that coffee . She had lost a bottle of opium -- but that was on the trip from New Orleans . Or someone had taken it during her first day at Honotassa . Yes , she had missed it after her talk with Emile , after dinner , just before Emile was shot . Rilly or Glendora had entered her room while she slept , bringing back her washed clothes . So somebody else could have come in , too -- then or later while she was out of the room . It would have been easy to identify as opium by its odor . It was not very reasonable to believe that Lucien had procured unprocurable opium and come back to Honotassa with a formed plan to murder her . He didn't even know that she was there . And he certainly couldn't have guessed that she would resist his demand for the gold or that she was not the yielding -- yes , and credible fool he had every right to expect . No , he had been surprised , unpleasantly surprised , but surprised . Then somebody else ? ? Don't question , Rev had said , don't invite danger . Her skin crawled : Lolotte had told Maude that she was in the hall and the door was open . Sarah had begun to tell Lucien of Emile , she had begun to question and a little draft had crept across the room from the bedroom door , open barely enough to show a rim of blackness in the hall . So Lolotte -- or anybody -- could have listened , and that somebody could have already been supplied with the missing bottle of opium . That was not reasonable either . The opium had disappeared before Emile's death and whoever shot him could not by any stretch of the imagination have foreseen Sarah's own doubts and suspicions -- and questions . She began to doubt whether there had been in fact a lethal dose of opium in the cup . So suppose somebody only wished to frighten her , so she would leave Honotassa ! ! That made a certain amount of logic . Added to the argument was the fact that while she might have tasted the coffee if it had been still hot , she might even have drunk some of it , she wouldn't have taken enough to kill her , for she would have been warned by its taste . No . It was merely an attempt to frighten her . She wouldn't go back to New York as Maude suggested ; ; she wouldn't run like a scared cat . But -- well , she'd be very careful . She dressed and the accustomed routine restored to her a sense of normal everyday life . But before she left her room she dug into her big moire bag , took out the envelope holding her marriage contract and the wax seal had been broken . So somebody else knew what would happen to her father's money if she died . Rev had known all along . Rev didn't need to break the wax seal , read the contract and find out . He could conceivably have wished to make sure ; ; Rev loved Honotassa , it was like a part of his breath and body ; ; Rev had stressed the need for money . Rev would never have tried to give her poison ! ! She thrust the envelope back in the bag ; ; there was no point in locking it up in the armoire now , it was like locking the barn after the horse was stolen . And in all likelihood , by now , there was more than one person in the house who knew the terms of her marriage contract . There was no point either in telling herself again what a fool she'd been . She went downstairs and received another curious shock , for when Glendora flapped into the dining room in her homemade moccasins , Sarah asked her when she had brought coffee to her room and Glendora said she hadn't . `` Too much work this morning , Miss Sarah -- everybody gone like that '' -- Sarah swallowed past another kind of constriction in her throat . `` Well , then who brought it '' ? ? `` Miss Maude . She come to the kitchen and say she take it up to you '' . Glendora put down a dish of lukewarm rice . `` Not much breakfast this morning . I don't know what we're going to do , Miss Sarah '' . `` We've got to eat '' , Sarah said , curtly , because a chill crawled over her again . Maude ? ? Glendora flapped away . The rice wasn't dosed with opium , indeed it had no taste at all , not a grain of salt . She ate what she could and went out along the covered passageway , with the rain dripping from the vines . In the kitchen Glendora was despairingly picking chickens . `` Get a basket '' , Sarah told her . `` We'll go to the storehouse '' . Glendora dropped a chicken and a flurry of feathers , and went with her through the drizzle , to the storehouse . Sarah found the right key and unlocked the door . It was a long , low room , like a root cellar , for it was banked up with soil , and vines had run rampant over that , too . It was dark but dry and cool . She doled out what Glendora vaguely guessed were the right amounts of dried peas , eggs , cornmeal , a little salt . The shelves looked emptier than when Miss Celie had shown her the storeroom , and since the men from the Commissary had called ; ; there were certainly now fewer mouths to feed but there was less to feed them with . She took Glendora to the smokehouse , unlocked it and saw with satisfaction there was still a quantity of hams and sides of bacon , hanging from the smoke-stained rafters . They wouldn't go hungry , not yet . And the fields were green and growing . `` Can't you possibly imagine what life is going to be like , here '' ? ? Maude had said . Maude . She sent Glendora back to the house , her basket and her apron laden . She stood for a moment , rain dripping from the trees over her head , thinking of Maude . Maude had the opportunity to take the bottle of opium from Sarah's room . Maude had the cool ruthlessness to do whatever she made up her mind to do . She couldn't see how her death could affect Maude . She couldn't see any reason why Maude would attempt to frighten her . Besides , there was something hysterical and silly , something almost childish about an attempt to frighten her . Maude was neither hysterical nor silly and Sarah rather doubted if she had ever been childish . Yet Maude had suggested that Sarah return to New York . Maude could have shot Emile -- if she'd had a reason to kill him . There was no use in standing there in the drizzle , trying to find a link between Emile's murder and opium in a cup of coffee . She started back for the house , saw a light in the office , opened the door and surprised a domestic little scene which was far outside the dark realm of murder or attempted murder . Rev , George and Lolotte were mending shoes . A lighted lamp stood on the table that dusky , drizzling day . They were all three bent over a shabby riding boot ; ; George had a tack hammer . Lolotte held a patch of leather , Rev steadied something , a tiny brad , waiting for George's poised hammer . George said , `` First thing I do when I get to Vicksburg again , is get me a Yankee '' -- `` With boots on '' , Lolotte laughed softly . Rev looked up and saw her . Lolotte looked up and stiffened . George didn't look up at all . There was no way to know , no way to guess whether any one of them was surprised at Sarah's appearance , believing her to be drugged and senseless -- and just possibly dead . Rev said , `` Come in , Sarah . Reckon you know the news '' . And what news , Sarah thought as satirically as Maude might have said it . Rev's face was suddenly a little fixed and questioning . He turned to George and Lolotte . `` Take your cobbler's shop somewhere else . I want to talk to Sarah '' . Everything in the office , the spreading circle of lamplight , the patch of leather in Lolotte's hands . George poised with the tack hammer , the homely , everyday atmosphere , all denied an attempt at murder . A rush of panic caught Sarah . `` No . Not now . I mean I've got to -- to see to the kitchen . Glendora '' -- Her words jumbled together and she all but ran from the office and from the question in Rev's face . Now why did I do that ? ? She thought as warm , drizzling rain touched her face . She was no schoolgirl , refusing to bear tales . As she reached the kitchen door the answer presented itself ; ; if she told anyone of the opium it must be Lucien , her husband . It might be , indeed it had already proved to be a marriage without love , but it was marriage . So she couldn't choose Rev as a confidant ; ; it must be Lucien . Always provided that Lucien himself had not dosed her coffee with opium , she thought , as coldly and sharply , again , as Maude might have said it . She paused at the kitchen door , caught her breath , told herself firmly that the opium was only an attempt to frighten her and went into the kitchen , where Glendora was eyeing the chickens dismally and Maude was cleaning lamp chimneys . Glendora gave a gulp . `` Miss Sarah , I can't cut up no chicken . Miss Maude say she won't '' . Again the homely , everyday details of daily living refuted a vicious attempt to frighten her -- or to murder her . The homely everyday details of living and domestic requirements also pressed upon her with their immediate urgency . No matter what had happened or hadn't happened , somebody had to see about dinner . She eyed the chickens with , if she had known it , something of Glendora's dismal look and thought with a certain fury of the time she had spent on Latin verbs . `` Not since last night . I didn't think there was any reason to '' . `` Maybe there isn't . Speak to him again anyway . Try talking to some of the fellows he works with , friends , anyone . Try to find out how happy he is with his wife , whether he plays around with women . You might try looking into his wife too . She might have been talking to some of her friends about her husband if they've been having any trouble '' . `` You think Black's the one we're looking for '' ? ? `` Yeah . I think he might be '' , Conrad said grimly . `` Then again he might not '' . `` What a stinking world '' , Rourke said . `` Black is Gilborn's best friend '' . `` I know '' . `` Will you be coming back soon '' ? ? `` I think so . I'm on my way to see the Jacobs woman '' . `` Gilborn's secretary ? ? What for ? ? You don't think Gilborn is the -- '' ? ? `` I don't think anything . I just don't want to go off half-cocked before picking up Black , that's all '' . Conrad interrupted . `` Gilborn says he was in his office all day with her yesterday . I'd like to make sure . Also , it's just possible she might know something about Mrs. Gilborn '' . `` Right . I'll see you later '' . `` Aren't you ever going to go home '' ? ? `` It sure as hell doesn't look like it , does it ? ? I'm telling you , if these corpses ever knew the trouble they put us to , they'd think twice before letting themselves get knocked off '' . `` Remember to tell that to the next corpse you meet '' . Conrad hung up and sat on the small telephone-booth bench , massaging his right leg . He looked at his watch . It was ten minutes before eleven . He wondered how long it would be before they had a signed confession from Lionel Black . Thirty years' experience let him know , even at this early stage , that Black was his man . But he still wanted to know why . It was a cold , windy day , the day after Kitti's death , but Stanley Gilborn paid no attention to the blustery October wind . After leaving Conrad , Gilborn had no destination . He simply walked , not noticing where he was , not caring . He stopped automatically at the street corners , waiting for the traffic lights to change , unheeding of other people , his coat open and flapping . As he walked , he tried to think . Of Kitti . Of himself . Mainly of what Conrad had tried to make him believe . There was nothing coherent about his thinking . It was a succession of picture-images passing through his mind : the same ones , different ones , in no apparent sequence , in no logical succession . The enormity of what Conrad had told him made it impossible for Gilborn to accept , with any degree of realism , the actuality of it . Conrad's words had intellectual meaning for him only . Emotionally , they penetrated him not at all . Whoever he was and your wife were intimate . Gilborn remembered Conrad's exact words . They made sense and yet they didn't . He knew Conrad had told him the truth . It was so . Yet it wasn't so . It wasn't so because it couldn't be so . When Kitti was alive -- and he remembered the pressure of her hand resting lightly on his arm -- she had been the center of his life . She was the sun , he the closest planet orbiting around her , the rest of the world existing and visible yet removed . For fifty-five years he had lived , progressing towards a no-goal , eating , working , breathing without plan , without reason . Kitti had come along to justify everything . She was his goal , she was his reason . He had lived all his life waiting for her . Not once , in the time that he had known her , had he ever considered the possibility , not once , not for one one-thousandth of a second , of her infidelity . He could not consider it now . Not really . And so he walked , aimless again . The walk ended , inevitably , right in front of his hotel building . The doorman began to nod his head automatically , then remembered who Gilborn was , what had happened to him the night before . He looked at Gilborn with undisguised curiosity . Gilborn passed by him without seeing him . He crossed the lobby and rode up in the elevator lost in his own thoughts . In the apartment itself , all was still . The police were no longer there . There was no evidence that anything was different than it had been . Except that Kitti wasn't there . Without taking off his coat , he sat in the blue chair which still faced the closed bedroom door . At last , sitting there , in the familiar surroundings , the truth began to sink in . Who ? ? He felt no anger towards Kitti , no sense that she had betrayed him . Who ? ? She was all he had , everything he had , everything he wanted . Someone had taken her away from him . Who ? ? Where there is a left-hand entry in the ledger , there is a right-hand one , he remembered from his school days . Where there is a victim , there is a killer . Who ? ? Whoever he was and your wife were intimate . He rose from the chair , took off his coat . Quickly , he went into the bedroom . The bed still showed signs of where Kitti had lain . Gilborn stood there for a long time . He looked at the bed unblinkingly . The bed was empty now . Kitti would lie in it no more . He would lie in it no more . Gilborn wondered whether Kitti had lain in that same bed with Who ? ? For thirty minutes , Stanley Gilborn stood there . At the end of the half-hour , racking his brains , thinking over and over again of Kitti , her friends , her past , he left the bedroom . Who ? ? He could think of no answer . Gilborn put on his coat again . Before leaving , he took one last , lingering look at the apartment . He knew he would never see it again . In the street , walking as quickly as he could , Stanley Gilborn was a lone figure . On Blanche Jacobs , Kitti Gilborn's death had a quite different effect . For Blanche , Kitti's death was a source of guilty , but nonetheless soaring , happy hope . In Blanche's defense , it must be said she was unaware of the newborn hope . If anyone had asked her , she would have described herself only as nervous and worried . The figures on the worksheet paper in front of her were jumping and waving around so badly it was all she could do to make them out clearly enough to copy them with the typewriter . She wondered whether Stanley would call . She wanted to be with him , to give him the comfort and companionship she knew he needed . She had skipped her lunch hour in the fear that he might call while she was out . He hadn't . And now she was feeling sick , both from concern about Stanley and hunger . Why hadn't he called ? ? Men , she reflected , even men like Stanley , are unpredictable . She tried to think of his unpredictable actions in the eleven years she had known him and discovered they weren't so many after all . Stanley really was quite predictable . That was one of the things she liked about Stanley . He wasn't like so many other men . The dentist last night , for instance . Dinner and the movies had been fine . He had taken her upstairs to say good night . She had invited him in for coffee . It was in the kitchen , as she was watching the kettle , waiting for the water to boil , that he had grabbed for her . Without warning , without giving her a chance to prepare for it . From behind , he had put his arms on her shoulders , turned her around , and pressed her to him , so close she couldn't breathe . Later , she apologized for the long scratch across his face , tried to explain she couldn't help herself , that the panic arose in her unwanted . But he hadn't understood . When he left , she knew she would never see him again . Stanley wasn't like that . She could always predict what Stanley was going to do , ever since she first met him . Except for that one morning . The morning he walked in to announce to her , blushing , that he was married . She thought she was going to die . She had assumed before then that one day he would ask her to marry him . Blanche couldn't remember when she had first arrived at this conclusion . She thought it was sometime during the second week she worked for Stanley . It was nothing that he said or did , but it seemed so natural to her that she should be working for him , looking forward to his eventual proposal . She was thirty-one years old then . Her mother was already considerably concerned over her daughter's future . But Blanche had been able to maintain a serene and assured composure in the face of her widowed mother's continued carping , had been able to resist her urgings to date anyone who offered the slightest possibility of matrimony . For Blanche , it was only a matter of time before Stanley would propose . It was to be expected that Stanley would be shy , slow in taking such a momentous step . Stanley went along in life , she knew , convinced that he deserved the love and faith of no woman . As a result , he never looked for it . But one day , she expected , he would somehow discover , without her having to tell him , that there was such a woman in the world ; ; a woman who was willing to give him love , faith , and anything else a woman could give a husband . Indeed , there was a woman who , unasked , had already given him love . Unquestionably , Blanche loved Stanley . And then , unexpectedly , Stanley made his announcement . On that first day , Blanche literally thought she was going to die , or , at the very least , go out of her mind . It might have been easier for her if Kitti Walker hadn't been everything that Blanche was not . Kitti was thirty years younger than Stanley , taller than Stanley , prettier than Stanley had any right to hope for , much less expect . Kitti could have married a score of men . There was no reason for her to marry someone like Stanley Gilborn , there was no need for her to marry Stanley . Kitti had come into the office , on somebody's recommendation , because she needed help in preparing her income tax return . Stanley had filled out the return and because , when he was finished , it was close to the lunch hour , he had politely asked Kitti to join him , never expecting her to accept . Blanche knew all this because the door to Stanley's office was open and , without straining too hard , she could hear everything that was said . Stanley had gone out , saying he would be back in an hour . He hadn't come back for over two . After that day , Blanche still didn't know exactly what had happened . There were mornings when Stanley came in late , afternoons when he left early , days when he didn't come in at all . Blanche knew something must be causing Stanley's new , strange behavior but she never once connected it with Kitti Walker . It was too unprecedented . Then , six weeks after the day Kitti first came into the office , Stanley announced he and Kitti were married . Somehow , Blanche managed to cover the stunned surprise and offer her congratulations . That night the two of them left for a week's honeymoon in Acapulco . While they were away Blanche came into the office every morning , running things as she had always run them for Stanley , going through the week in a dazed stupor , getting things done automatically , out of habit . For exactly one week , she was able to continue in this manner . On the morning of Stanley's return , however , her strength left her . Two hours of watching his serenely happy face , listening to his soft humming as he bent over his penciled figures , and Blanche had to leave . She stayed away for ten days . Those ten days were like no others that Blanche had known . Mostly , she stayed in bed . She didn't tell anyone , even her mother , what was wrong . She refused to have a doctor , insisting there was nothing a doctor could do for her . `` Right '' , said the fingerprint man . `` Also , if you're going to believe those prints , you'll have to look for a killer who's a top-grade piano player '' . He demonstrated by playing an imaginary piano , doing a staccato passage with a broadly exaggerated attack . To make it clearer he shifted to acting out , but with no change of manner , the killing of Rose Mallory . His hands snatched at an imaginary bucket , swooping down hard to grab it and coming away with equal snap like a ball that's been bounced hard . In the same way he pantomimed grasping a mantel and bouncing cleanly off that , pressing his hands against the floor and bouncing cleanly off that . He was moving like a ballet dancer , playing for laughs . If Rose Mallory's killer acted this way , catching up with him was going to be a cinch . We'd know him by his stretch pants and the flowers he'd wear twined in his hair . Perhaps if Felix had first come upon us when this boy was not cavorting so gaily up and down the hall outside the murdered woman's apartment , we might have had less trouble convincing Felix of our seriousness . This , you will remember , was still New Year's Day . By the time Felix turned up it was early afternoon , which , one would think , would be late enough so that by then , except for small children and a few hardy souls who had not yet sobered up , it could have been expected that people would no longer be having any sort of active interest in the previous night's noisemakers and paper hats . Felix was the exception . He had retained his hat and his horn , and , whatever fun might still be going , he was ready to join it . That , incidentally , might give you some idea of what Felix was like . After all , he hadn't happened upon us in that second-floor hall without warning . The M.E.'s boys had finished their on-the-spot examination and the body had been removed for autopsy . The meat wagon , therefore , was not out in front of the house any more , but the cluster of squad cars was still there and there was a cop on the door downstairs to screen any comings and goings . There was , furthermore , the crowd of curious onlookers gathered in the street and a couple more cops to hold them at a decent distance . Just put yourself in Felix's place for a moment . You're a taxpayer , householder , landlord . You've been away from home for the New Year festivities , but now the party is over and you come home . Defining sobriety in the limited sense of being free from the clinical symptoms of the effects of alcohol ingested and not yet eliminated from the system , you are sober . You still have your paper hat and you're wearing it , but then , it is an extraordinary paper hat and , in addition to anything else you may be , you are also the sculptor who created that most peculiar dame out in the back yard . It's not too much to assume that you will have a more lasting interest in paper hats than will Mr. Average Citizen . You have your paper horn clutched in your big , craggy fist , and for your entrance you have planned a noisy , colorful and exuberant greeting to your friends and tenants . You find your house a focus of public and police attention . Can you imagine yourself forgetting under the circumstances that you are approaching this startling and unexpected situation so unsuitably hatted and armed with a paper horn ? ? Maybe one could be startled into forgetfulness . You shoulder your way through the cluster of the curious and you barge up to the cop on the door . You identify yourself and ask him what's going on . Instead of answering you , he sticks his head in the door and shouts up the stairs . `` Got the upstairs guy '' , he bellows . `` The owner . Do I send him up '' ? ? Then he turns back to you . `` Go on in '' , he says . `` They'll tell you what's cooking '' . Even then , as you go into the house oppressed by the knowledge that something is cooking and that your house has passed under this unaccountable , official control , could you go on forgetting that you still had that ridiculous hat on your head and you were still carrying that childish horn in your hand ? ? What I'm getting at is that we were fully prepared for Felix's being an odd one . We'd seen his handiwork out in the back yard , and the little his tenants had told us of him did make him sound a little special . We were not , however , prepared for anything like the apparition that confronted us as Felix came up the stairs . He , of course , must have been equally unprepared for what confronted him , but , nonetheless , I did find his reaction startling . If Felix was still wearing the hat and carrying the horn because he'd forgotten about them , he now remembered . He came bounding up the stairs and joined the dance . He adjusted the hat , lifted the horn to his lips as though it were a flute , and fell in alongside our fingerprint expert to cavort with him . Our man stopped dead and glowered at Felix . Felix threw his head back and laughed a laugh that shook the timbers of even that solidly built old house . This was a bull of a man . He was big-chested , big-shouldered and heavy-armed . His face was ruddy and heavy and unlined , and when he laughed he showed his teeth , which were big and white and strong and unquestionably home-grown . I don't remember ever seeing teeth that were quite so white and at the same time quite so emphatically not dentures . His hair had receded most of the way to the back of his neck . He had only a fringe of hair and he wore it cropped short . It was almost as white as his teeth . For a man of his mass he was curiously short . He wasn't a dwarf but he was a bit of a comic figure . A man with so big and so staggeringly developed a torso and such long and powerful arms is expected to stand taller than five feet five . For Felix it was a bit of a stretch to make even that measurement . The man was just this side of being a freak . We waited till he had finished laughing , and that gave us a few moments for taking stock of him . He was dressed in a manner Esquire might suggest for the outdoor man's country weekend . Dark gray sports jacket , lighter gray slacks , pink flannel shirt , black silk necktie . His eyes were clear . He was freshly shaved , and if there had been any alcohol in him we could never have missed detecting some scent of it on the massive gusts of his laughter . Not even a whiff . Eventually he subsided . `` Felix '' ? ? Gibby said . `` Me '' , he said merrily . `` Me , the happy one '' . `` That much Latin we remember '' , Gibby said dryly . `` You always live up to your name , always like this , always making happy '' ? ? `` I try '' , Felix said blithely . `` The world is full of blokes who put their hearts into making the tragic scene . I've never noticed that it improves things any '' . `` Bully for you '' , Gibby said . `` What's the rest of your name '' ? ? `` No rest of it . Felix is all there is '' . `` All there ever was '' ? ? `` The past I leave to historians '' , Felix intoned , demonstrating that he could be pompous as well as happy . `` You live in the present '' ? ? `` In the present '' , Felix proclaimed . `` For the future . Is there any other time in which a man can live '' ? ? `` We '' , Gibby announced , `` are not philosophers . We are Assistant District Attorneys . This gentleman is a police officer . He is a fingerprint specialist . Could your future , your immediate future , be made to include taking us upstairs , giving us a bit of space in which our friend can work , and making available to him your finger tips '' ? ? The happy one could never have looked happier . This was more than joy . It was ecstasy . `` Those lovely whorls '' , he chortled . `` So intricate , so beautiful . Come right along . I love fingerprints '' . He was prancing along the hall , heading for the next flight of stairs . Gibby called him back . `` We're here because of what happened last night '' , he said . `` Past , yes , but important . Since it is important , for the record let's have the full name '' . `` That important '' ? ? Felix asked . `` That important '' . `` Grubb '' , Felix whispered . `` Felix Grubb '' ? ? Gibby asked , not bothering to whisper . `` Shh '' , Felix implored . `` I can't see what would make it necessary for you to know . Nothing could make it necessary to proclaim it to the whole world '' . Obligingly Gibby lowered his voice . `` Felix Grubb '' ? ? He repeated . `` No . Edmund , but not for years . For years it's been just Felix . First thing I did after my twenty-first birthday was go into court and have it officially changed , and this is something I don't tell everybody . That was almost forty years ago '' . Having volunteered that he was a man of about sixty , he bounded up the stairs and with each leap rendered the number less credible . This was a broth of a boy , our Felix , and nothing was more obvious than the joy he took in demonstrating how agile he was and how full of juice and spirit . We followed him up the stairs . The cops would gather up Connor and the foursome on the third floor and bring us those of them who would voluntarily submit to fingerprinting . You may think we didn't need Nancy and Jean , but you always get what you can when you can , and we had no guarantee that a fingerprint record on them couldn't be useful before we were through with this case . Also , if we had excluded the ladies we would have to that extent let the whole world know at least that much of where we stood . The killer , if in our present group , would certainly be interested in knowing that much , and even though with the fingerprint evidence what it was I could see no way he could use this bit of information to improve on his situation , there might always be some way . If you can possibly avoid it , you don't hand out any extra chances . Felix took us into his studio . It was that oddly shaped space at the very top of the house , where ceiling heights had to accommodate themselves to the varying angles of roof slope . At each angle of its pitch a big skylight had been fitted into the roof and all these skylights were fitted with systems of multiple screens and shades . When Felix first opened the door on it , all these shades were tightly drawn and the whole studio was as dark as night . He quickly fixed that , rolling back the shades on some of the skylights and adjusting screens on the others . He flew about the place making these adjustments and it was obvious that what he was doing was the fruit of long experience . None of his movements was tentative . There was no process of trial and error . Starting with the room completely blacked out , as it was when we came in , he unerringly fixed things so that the whole place was bathed in the maximum of light without at any point admitting even so much as a crack of glare . Expecting something more-than-average wacky , I was surprised by what we found . There was no display of either works in progress or of finished work . Here and there on work table or pedestal stood a shape with a sheet or a tarpaulin draped over it . These shapes might have been mad , but there was no telling . They were all completely shrouded . The equipment was solid and heavy and in good condition . Everything was orderly and it seemed to be arranged for the workman's comfort , convenience and efficiency . There were tools about but they were neatly kept . There was no confusion and no litter . Supplies of sheet metal were neatly stacked in bins . Andy did not see the newspapers the next day . Someone on his staff -- he suspected it was Ed Thornburg -- intercepted them and for this Andy was grateful . He finally fell asleep around six in the morning with the aid of a sleeping capsule , a crutch he rarely used , and didn't awaken until early afternoon . Memory flooded him the instant he opened his eyes and the sick feeling knotted his stomach . Outside his window bloomed a beautiful summer day . Presumably the same sun was shining upon little Drew also , and those who had kidnapped him . But where ? ? It was still a very big world , despite all the modern cant to the contrary . Hub was sitting in a chair that blocked the hall door . He was dozing , perhaps the only sleep he'd gotten . He snapped to alertness at Andy's entrance . `` Sorry , Mr. Paxton . Nothing new . Lot of people waiting to see you , though '' . `` Reporters '' ? ? `` Our own people . Questions about the show tonight '' . Hub picked up the telephone . `` Shall I let them know you're awake '' ? ? `` I suppose . How's Lissa , do you know '' ? ? Hub considered . `` Some better . She's got plenty of guts , Mr. Paxton . You want me to call her '' ? ? `` She expecting me to '' ? ? Hub shook his head so Andy told him not to bother . The only reason for contacting Lissa was to comfort or to be comforted . He could not manage the former or expect the latter ; ; they had nothing to give to each other . The omission might look peculiar to outsiders , but Andy could not bring himself to go through the motions simply for the sake of appearances . He had little time to himself , anyway . As the afternoon sped toward evening , the suite saw a steady procession of Paxton aides pass in and out , each with his own special problem . Thornburg arrived with the writers . They had spent the morning revising the act , eliminating all the gay songs , patter and dancing with a view of the best public relations . What remained lacked the original verve but it was at least dignified , as befitting the tragic circumstances . Raymond Fox reported that the orchestra had hastily rehearsed `` Cradle Song '' in case it was needed . Charlie Marble was back and forth on several occasions , first to confer with Andy on the advisability of cancelling the Las Vegas engagement -- they decided it was wise -- and later to announce that a prominent comedian , also an agency client , had agreed to fill the casino's open date . And once Bake slipped in , pale and drawn , last night's liquor still on his breath with some of today's added to it . He asked if there was anything he could do . Andy invented a job to keep him busy , sending him ahead to El Dorado to supervise last minute arrangements . But from Rocco Vecchio , they heard nothing . At last it was time to depart . Hub , nosing about , spotted reporters in the lobby , so Andy was hustled away quietly through the hotel's service entrance in a strange car which Hub had procured somewhere . They succeeded in eluding the curious at the hotel , but there was no chance of avoiding them at the nightclub . El Dorado was surrounded by a mob . They overflowed the parking lot , making progress by automobile difficult . Long before he reached the protection of the stage door , Andy was recognized . Word of his arrival spread through the crowd like a brushfire . They surged around him , fingers pointing , eyes prying . It was not a hostile gathering but Andy sensed the difference from last night's hero-worshippers . They had come not to admire but to observe . `` It's worse inside '' , Thornburg informed Andy . `` Skolman's jammed in every table he could find . Under the heading of it's an ill wind , et cetera '' . Backstage was tomblike by contrast . Andy's co-workers kept their distance , awed by the tragedy . But in his dressing room was a large bouquet and a card that read , `` We're with you all the way '' . It was signed by everyone in the troupe . Andy couldn't help but be touched . He instructed Shirl Winter to compose a note of thanks to be posted on the call board . Bake was waiting to report that Lou DuVol had been sobered up to the point where he could function efficiently . Andy gathered that this had been no small accomplishment . Bake himself looked better ; ; any kind of job was better than brooding . Andy told him , `` Bake , I wish you'd talk to Skolman , see if some kind of p. a. system can be rigged up outside . It's just barely possible with this crowd that the kidnapper wasn't able to get a table . I wouldn't want him to miss the message '' . `` I'll try . Skolman isn't going to like it much , though , giving away what he should be selling '' . Skolman wasn't the only one who didn't care for Andy's scheme . A short time later , Lieutenant Bonner stomped into the dressing room . `` I got a bone to pick with you , Mr. Paxton . It's those damn loudspeakers '' . Andy rolled up the revised script he had been studying . `` What about them '' ? ? `` They're going to louse me up good . My men have been here all afternoon , setting up for this thing '' . Bonner explained that , with the nightclub's cooperation , the police had occupied El Dorado like a battlefield . Motion picture cameras had been installed to film the audience , the reservation list was being checked out name by name , and a special detail was already at work in the parking lot scrutinizing automobiles for a possible lead . However , it was virtually impossible to screen the mob outside , even if Bonner had manpower available for the purpose . `` I want you to have the speakers taken out '' . Andy sighed . `` Seems like we're never going to see eye to eye , Lieutenant . Didn't they tell you what I wanted the p. a. system for '' ? ? `` Sure , I know . But it's such a long shot '' -- `` No longer than yours . What do you expect to get tonight , anyway ? ? You think somebody is going to stand up in the audience and make guilty faces ? ? Or have a sign on his car that says , ' Here Comes the Paxton Kidnapper ' '' ? ? Andy crumbled the script in his fist . `` I can't stop you from doing what you think is right . But don't try to stop me , either '' . `` Someday '' , Bonner said , `` you're going to ask us for help . I can hardly wait '' . `` What you don't understand is that I'm asking for it now '' . But Bonner departed , still full of ill will . He had gotten stuck with a job too big for his imagination ; ; he had to cling to routine , tested procedures . To act otherwise would be to admit his helplessness . But , admit or not , Bonner was helpless . The crime showed too much planning , the kidnappers appeared too proficient to be caught by a checklist . Andy's performance was scheduled for eleven o'clock . He stalled for a half-hour longer , hoping to hear something from Vecchio about the ransom money . Bake and Shirl Winter , on separate telephones , could not reach him at any conceivable location in Los Angeles , nor could they secure any clear-cut information regarding his efforts . Bake cursed . `` The sweaty bastard's probably halfway to Peru with our money by now '' . When no one smiled , he felt constrained to add , `` Just kidding , natch '' . Thornburg popped in to advise , `` Andy , Skolman's sending up smoke signals . You about ready '' ? ? `` What's he complaining about '' ? ? Bake asked . `` They're drinking , aren't they '' ? ? `` No . We got a bunch of sippers out there tonight . I guess nobody wants to pass out and miss anything '' . Thornburg added in a lower voice but Andy overheard , `` They act more like a jury than an audience '' . Andy said , `` Well , I guess we can't wait any longer . Hub , you stick by the stage door . If Rock shows up during the number -- or you hear anything -- give me the signal '' . Shirl Winter said , `` I'll stay on the phone , Mr. Paxton . There's a couple of call-backs I can work on '' . `` You're a sweetheart -- but leave one line open . He may try to phone us '' . Andy passed into the corridor , their `` good lucks '' ! ! Following him . It was what they said before every performance but tonight it sounded different , as if he really needed it . They were right . The act , cut to shreds and hastily patched together during the afternoon , had not been rehearsed sufficiently by anyone . The result had nothing of the polish , pace or cohesion of the previous night . Here's where luck would normally step in . But this was no ordinary show and Andy knew it . Whether he sang well or badly had nothing to do with it . The audience had come not to be entertained but to judge . Twenty-four hours had changed him from a performer to a freak . Within this framework , what followed was strained , even macabre . Eliminating the patter and the upbeat numbers left little but blues and other songs of equal melancholy . The effect was as depressing as a gravestone , the applause irresolute and short-lived . Yet Andy plowed ahead , mouthing the inconsequential words as if they possessed real meaning , and gradually his listeners warmed to him . Their clapping grew more fervent ; ; the evening was still not beyond salvaging , not as a show but for him as a person . The worst was yet to come . As Andy reached the finale of his act , a subdued commotion backstage drew his attention to the wings . Rocco Vecchio -- a perspiring , haggard Vecchio -- was standing there , flanked by two men in the uniforms of armored transport guards . Vecchio was nodding and pointing at the large suitcase he held . Andy felt his heart thud heavily with relief . He waved at Fox to cut off the finale introduction . The music died away discordantly . He drew a deep breath . `` Ladies and gentlemen , in place of my regular closing number tonight , I'd like to sing something of a different nature for you . Ray , if you please -- the ' Cradle Song ' '' . He sensed rather than heard the gasp that swept across the audience . Nor could he blame them . This particular song at this particular time could only be interpreted as the ultimate in bad taste , callous exploitation beyond the bounds of decency . Having no choice , he plunged into it , anyway , holding onto the microphone for support . `` Lullaby and goodnight . '' His voice shook . For the first time in his life he forgot the lyrics midway through and had to cover up by humming the rest . He wondered if the audience would let him finish . They did ; ; though contemptuous , they were still polite . But when he was finally through , their scorn was made apparent . Someone clapped tentatively then quickly stopped . Otherwise , the silence was complete . As the lights came up , Andy could see that a number of patrons were already on their way toward the exit . He stumbled off-stage . `` My God '' , he muttered . `` My God '' . Hub was there to support him . `` It's okay , Mr. Paxton . The money's here , all of it '' . At this moment , all he could think of was what he'd been forced to undergo . `` Did you hear them ? ? Do you know what they think of me '' ? ? `` Bunch of damn jerks '' , Hub growled . `` Who needs them '' ? ? Thornburg patted his arm . `` Sure , Andy , it'll be all right . Nothing broken that can't be mended '' . The words were hollow . Thornburg knew , better than any of them , that a public image was as fragile as Humpty Dumpty . All the king's horses and all the king's men Vecchio shouldered in . `` I got it , Andy . God knows how , but I got it . You'll never believe the places I've been today . I practically had to sign your life away , you'll probably fire me for some of the deals I had to go for , but '' -- Andy nodded dully . `` It doesn't matter , Rock . We've done our part '' . He clutched that knowledge to him as he returned to his dressing room . The usual congratulatory crowd was conspicuously absent ; ; the place had the air of a morgue . Andy had no desire to linger himself but Hub reported that the mob outside was still large despite the efforts of the police to disperse them . His son watched until he got as far as the hall , almost out of sight , then hurried after . `` Dad . Dad , wait '' . He caught up with the old man in the living room . Old man Arthur had put down the suitcase to open the front door . `` Just this one favor , Dad . Just don't tell Ferguson that crazy opinion of yours '' . `` Why not '' ? ? The old man gave the room a stare in leaving ; ; under the scraggly brows the pale old eyes burned with a bitter memory . `` It's the truth '' . `` The Bartlett girl was killed by Mr. Dronk's son . Rossi and Ferguson have been across the street , talking to the kid . They've found some sort of new evidence , a bundle of clothes or something , and it must link the kid even stronger to the crime . Why won't you accept facts ? ? The two kids were together a lot , they were having some kind of teen-age affair -- God knows how far that had gone -- and the kid's crippled . He limps , and the man who hit you and took the cane , he limped . My God , how much more do you want '' ? ? His father looked him over closely . `` You sound like an old woman . You should have gone to work today , 'stead of sneaking around spying on the Dronk house '' . `` Now , see here '' -- `` The trouble with you '' , old man Arthur began , and then checked himself . Young Mrs. Arthur had opened the oven and there was a drifting odor of hot biscuits . The old man opened the door and stepped out into the sunlight . `` Isn't enough time to go into it '' , he finished , and slammed the door in his son's face . Mrs. Holden turned from the window draperies . `` They found something else up there '' , she said half-aloud to the empty room . `` They took it away , overalls or something '' . She walked restlessly across the room , then back to the windows . `` Now they've gone , they didn't come back , and they didn't arrest that Dronk boy '' . She stood frowning and chewing her lip . She was wearing a brown cotton dress , cut across the hips in a way that was supposed to make her look slimmer , a yoke set into the skirt and flaring pleats below . She smoothed the skirt , sat down , then stood up and went back to the windows . `` Why on earth did I send him off to work ? ? There was excuse enough to keep him home that young Mr. Arthur's still over there '' . With sudden energy , she went to the phone and rang Holden's office and asked for him . `` I think you had better come home '' . `` Mae , we're so busy . Mr. Crosson's been on everybody's neck , an order he expected didn't come through and he's '' -- `` I don't care . I want you here . I'm all alone and certain things are going on that look very ominous . I need someone to go out and find out what's happening '' . `` But I couldn't do that , even if I were home '' ! ! His voice grew high and trembling . `` I can't be underfoot every time those cops turn around ! ! They'll they'll think I did something '' . He couldn't see the grin that split her mouth ; ; the teeth that shone into the phone were like a shark's . `` You'll just have to risk it . You can't wander along in the dark , can you ? ? I'd think that you even more than I would be wondering what they're up to . They found some clothes '' , she tossed in . `` What '' ? ? Deliberately , she ignored the yelp . `` Also , that Mr. Ferguson was here . I guess he wants to ask you some questions . I stalled him off . He doesn't expect you until five '' . `` Then I'd better wait until five '' . `` No-o-o . Come home right away '' . She slapped the receiver into its holder and stepped away . Her eyes were bright with anticipation . In his office , Mr. Holden replaced the phone slowly . He rose from his chair . He had to cough then ; ; he went to the window and choked there with the fresh breeze on his face . He got his hat out of the closet . For a moment he thought of going into Crosson's office to explain that he had to leave , but there was now such a pain in his chest , such a pounding in his head , that he decided to let it go . He passed the receptionist in the outer office , muttering , `` I've got to go out for a little while '' . Let her call Crosson if she wanted to , let Crosson raise the roof or even can him , he didn't care . He got into the car . Putting the key into the switch , pressing the accelerator with his foot , putting the car into reverse , seemed vast endeavors almost beyond the ability of his shaking body . Once out in the street , the traffic was a gadfly maze in which he wandered stricken . When he turned into the highway that led to the outskirts of the city and then rose toward home , he had to pull over to the curb and wait for a few minutes , sucking in air and squinting and blinking his eyes to clear them of tears . What on earth was in Mae's mind , that she wanted him up there spying on what the cops were doing ? ? What did she think he could do ? ? He tried to ignore what his own common sense told him , but it wasn't possible ; ; her motives were too blatant . She wanted him to get into trouble . She wanted the police to notice him , suspect him . She was going to keep on scheming , poking , prodding , suggesting , and dictating until the cops got up enough interest in him to go back to their old neighborhood and ask questions . And he knew in that moment , with a cold sinking of despair , a dying of old hopes , that Mae had spread some kind of word there among the neighbors . Nothing bald , open ; ; but enough . They'd have some suspicions to repeat to the police . Though his inner thoughts cringed at it , he forced himself to think back , recreating the scene in which Mae claimed to have caught him molesting the child . It hadn't amounted to anything . There had been nothing evil or dirty in his intentions . A second scene flashed before his mind , the interior of the garage at the new house and the young Bartlett girl turning startled to meet him , the dim dark and the sudden confusion and fear and then the brightness as Mae had clicked on the light . Suppose the cops somehow got hold of that ? ? Well , it hadn't been what it seemed , he'd had no idea the girl was in there . He hadn't touched her . And when he came to examine the scene , there was a certain staginess to it , it had the smell of planning , and a swift suspicion darted into his mind . Too monstrous , of course . Mae wouldn't have plotted a thing like that . It was just that little accidents played into her hands . Like this murder . He leaned on the wheel , clutching it , staring into the sunlight , and tried to bring order into his thoughts . He felt light-headed and sick . There was no use wandering off into a territory of utter nightmare . Mae was his wife . She was married to him for better or for worse . She wouldn't be wilfully planning his destruction . But she was . She was . Even as the conviction of truth roared through him , shattering his last hope of safety , he was reaching to release the hand brake , to head up the road for home , doing her bidding . He drove , and the road wobbled , familiar scenes crept past on either side . He came to a stretch of old orange groves , the trees dead , some of them uprooted , and then there was an outlying shopping area , and tract houses . He had the feeling that he should abandon the car and run off somewhere to hide . But he couldn't imagine where . There was really no place to go , finally , except home to Mae . At the gate he slowed , looking around . Cooper was beside his car , on the curb at the right , just standing there morosely ; ; he didn't even look up . Behind him on the steps of the little office sat old man Arthur ; ; he was straight , something angry in his attitude , as if he might be waiting to report something . Holden stepped on the gas . A new idea drifted in from nowhere . He could go to the police . He could tell them his fears of being involved , he could explain what had happened in the old neighborhood and how Mae had misunderstood and how she had held it over him -- the scene was complete in his mind at the moment , even to his own jerkings and snivelings , and Ferguson's silent patience . He could throw himself on the mercy of the Police Department . It wasn't what Mae would want him to do , though . He was sure of this . Once he had abandoned himself to the very worst , once he had quieted all the dragons of worry and suspense , there wouldn't be very much for Mae to do . At that moment , Holden almost slammed on the brakes to go back to Cooper and ask if Ferguson was about . It would be such a relief . What was that old sign , supposed to be painted over a door somewhere , Abandon hope , all ye who enter here ? ? Why , Holden said to himself , surprised at his own sudden insight , I'll bet some of those people who enter are just as happy as can be . They've worried , they've lain awake nights , they've shook at the slightest footstep , they've pictured their own destruction , and now it's all over and they can give up . Sure , they're giving up hope . Hand in hand with hope went things like terror and apprehension . Good-bye . Holden waved a hand at the empty street . Glad to see you go . He drove into the paved space before the garage and got out , slamming the car door . He looked up and down the street . If Ferguson's car had been in sight , Holden would have walked directly to it . He went to the front door and opened it and looked in . Mae entered the room from the hallway to the kitchen . She had a cup of something steaming , coffee perhaps , in one hand , a fresh piece of toast in the other . She stood there , watching Holden come in , and she put the piece of toast in her mouth and bit off one corner with a huge chomp of her white teeth . `` Mae '' -- `` I've been thinking '' , she said , swallowing the toast . `` Didn't you have an old pair of painting overalls in the garage ? ? You used them that time you painted the porch at our other house . And then you wiped up some grease '' . She had caught him off guard , no preparation , nothing certain but that ahead lay some kind of disaster . `` No . Wait a minute . What do you '' -- `` I've been looking for them , and they're gone . I'm sure they were in the garage up until a couple of days ago . Or even yesterday . You used to paint in them , and then you just took them for rags . The police have them now '' . `` I don't remember any overalls at all '' . `` They were all faded . Worn through at the knees '' . She stood sipping and chewing and watching . `` Green paint , wasn't it ? ? Well , I'm not sure of the color . But you had them '' . `` Mae , sit down . Put down the cup of coffee . Tell me what this is all about '' . She shook her head . She took another bite of toast . Holden noticed almost absently how she chewed , how the whole side of her cheek moved , a slab of fat that extended down into her neck . `` My goodness , you ought to remember if I do . You're going to have to go to the police and explain what happened . Tell them the truth or something before they come here '' . A seeping coldness entered Holden's being ; ; his nerves seemed frost-bitten down to the tips of his tingling fingers and his spine felt stiff and glass-like , liable to break like an icicle at any moment . `` I've never owned any painting overalls . A man with a sketch pad in hand sat with a large pink woman in a small office at the end of a long , dim corridor and made pencil lines on paper and said , `` Is this more like it , Mrs. MacReady ? ? Or are the eyebrows more like this '' ? ? When he had finished with that , he would go to another part of the hotel and say much the same things to someone else , most probably a busboy . `` Begin to look like him now , would you say ? ? Different about the mouth , huh ? ? More like this , maybe '' ? ? Men blew dust on objects in a room on the seventeenth floor of the Hotel Dumont and blew it off again , and did the same in a tiny , almost airless room in a tenement in the West Forties . And men also used vacuum cleaners in both rooms , sucking dust up once more . Men from the Third Detective District , Eighteenth Precinct , had the longest , the most tedious , job . At the Hotel Dumont there had , at the time in issue , been twenty-three overnighters , counting couples as singular . These included , as one , Mr. and Mrs. Anthony Payne , who had checked in a little after noon the day before , and had not checked out together . But Gardner Willings was not included ; ; he had been at the Dumont for almost a week . There was , of course , no special reason to believe that the man or woman they sought had stayed only overnight at the hotel . The twenty-three ( or twenty-two with the Paynes themselves omitted ) provided merely a place to start , and their identification was the barest of starts . With names and addresses listed , verification came next . It would take time ; ; it would , almost inevitably , trouble some water . ( `` I certainly was not at the Dumont last night and my husband couldn't have been . He's in Boston . Of course he's in '' -- ) The Hotel King Arthur across the street provided almost twice as many problems . The King Arthur offered respectable and convenient lodgings to people from the suburbs who wanted to see a show and didn't want -- heaven knew didn't want ! ! -- to lunge anxiously through crowded streets to railroad stations and , at odd hours of night , drive from smaller stations to distant homes , probably through rain or , in November , something worse . The King Arthur was less expensive than the Dumont . The King Arthur had fifty-four overnighters , again counting rooms rather than people . Check the overnighters out . Failing to find what was wanted , as was most likely , check out other guests , with special -- but not exclusive -- attention to those with rooms on the street . ( Anyone active enough can reach a roof , wherever his room may be . ) And know , while all this went on , that there was no real reason to suppose that the murderer had been a guest in either hotel . It was not even certain the shot had been fired from either hotel . There were other roofs , less convenient but not impossible . It is dull business , detecting , and hard on feet . There was also the one salient question to ask , and ask widely : Did you notice anything out of the way ? ? Like , for example , a man carrying a twenty-two rifle , probably with a telescopic sight attached ? ? There was , of course , no hope it really would be that simple . The sniper , whether psychopathic marksman or murderer by intent , would hardly have walked to his vantage point with rifle over shoulder , whistling a marching tune . Anybody carrying anything that might hide a rifle ? ? Long thin suitcase ? ? Or long fat suitcase , for that matter ? ? Shrugs met that , from room clerks , from bellhops . Who measures ? ? But nothing , it appeared , long enough to attract attention . Cases , say , for musical instruments ? ? None noted at the Dumont . Several at the King Arthur . A combo was staying there . And had been for a week . Anything else ? ? Anything at all ? ? Shrugs met that . ( Detective Pearson , Eighteenth Precinct , thought for a time he might be on to something . A refuse bin at the Dumont turned up a florist's box -- a very long box for very long-stemmed flowers . Traces of oil on green tissue ? ? The lab to check . The lab : sorry . No oil . ) Anything at all strange ? ? Well , a man had tried , at the King Arthur , to register with an ocelot . At the Dumont , a guest had come in a collapsible wheel chair . At the King Arthur one guest had had his head heavily bandaged , and another had a bandaged foot and had walked with crutches . There had also been a man who must have had St. Vitus or something , because he kept jerking his head . As reports dribbled in , William Weigand tossed them into the centrifuge which had become his head . Mullins came in . There was no sign of Mrs. Lauren Payne at her house on Nod Road , Ridgefield , Connecticut . The house was modern , large , on five acres . Must have cost plenty . The State cops would check from time to time ; ; pass word when there was word to pass . Weigand tossed this news into the centrifuge . Sort things out , damn it . Sort out the next move . Try to forget motive for the moment . Consider opportunity . Only those actually with Payne when he was shot , or who had left the party within not more than five minutes ( make five arbitrary ) positively had none . The Norths ; ; Hathaway , Jerry's publicity director ; ; Livingston Birdwood , producer of Uprising . They had been with Payne when he was shot , could not therefore have shot him from above . Take Gardner Willings . He had left after the scuffle ; ; had been seen to leave . He would have had ample time to go into a blind somewhere and wait his prey . Consider him seriously , therefore ? ? Intangibles entered , then -- hunches which felt like facts . Willings would ambush , certainly ; ; Willings undoubtedly had . Willings was , presumably , a better than average shot . But -- hunch , now -- Willings would not ambush anything which went on two legs instead of four . Because , if for no other reason , Willings would never for a moment suppose he was not bigger , tougher , than anything else that went on two legs . Ambushes are laid by those who doubt themselves , as any man may against a tiger . Faith Constable had had to `` go on '' from the party and had , presumably , gone on . To be checked out further . Forget motive ? ? No , motive is a part of fact . Nobody in his right mind punishes a quarter-century-old dereliction . Grudges simply do not keep that well in a sane mind . Faith Constable had accomplished much in a quarter of a century . Jeopardize it now to correct so old a wrong ? ? Bill shook his head . Also , he thought , I doubt if she could hit the side of a barn with a shotgun . Lauren herself ? ? She had left the party early , pleading a headache . No lack of opportunity , presuming she had a gun . She might , conceivably , have brought one in in a large-enough suitcase . ( Check on the Payne luggage . ) She might now have taken it away again . Motive -- her husband wandering ? ? Bitter , unreasoning jealousy ? ? Heaven knew it happened and hell knew it too . But -- it happened , almost always , among the primitive and , usually , among the very young . ( Call it mentally young ; ; call it retarded . ) There was nothing to indicate that Lauren Payne was primitive . She did not move in primitive circles . She was young , but not that young . It occurred to Bill Weigand that he was , on a hunch basis , eliminating a good many . He reminded himself that all eliminations were tentative . He also reminded himself that he had an unusual number of possibilities . The Masons , mother or son , or mother and son ? ? Opportunity was obvious . Motive . Here , too , the cause to hate lay well back in the years . But bitterness had more cause to remain , even increasingly to corrode . With the boy , particularly . The boy had , apparently -- if Mrs. MacReady was right in what she had told Mullins -- only in recent months been forced to give up college , to work as a busboy . Seeing the man he blamed for this made much of -- youth and bitterness and -- Bill picked up the telephone ; ; got Mullins . `` Send out a pickup on Mrs. Mason and the boy when you've got enough to go on '' , Bill said . `` Right '' ? ? Mullins would do . A man named Lars Simon , playwright-director , had expressed a wish that Anthony Payne drop dead . He would say , of course , that he had not really had any such wish ; ; that what he had said was no more than one of those things one does say , lightly , meaning nothing . Which probably would turn out to be true ; ; which he obviously had to be given the opportunity to say . A man named Blaine Smythe , with `` y '' and `` e '' but pronounced without them , had been fired at Payne's insistence . He was also , if Pam North was right , a closer acquaintance of Lauren Payne's than she , now , was inclined to admit . He might deny the latter ; ; would certainly deny any connection between the two things , or any connection of either with murder . He would have to be given the opportunity . Mullins ? ? It was evident that Mullins was the man to go . It was evident that a captain should remain at his desk , directing with a firm hand and keeping a firm seat . Bill Weigand was good and tired of the wall opposite , and the crack in the plaster . Let Mullins keep the firm seat ; ; let Stein . When Siamese cats are intertwined it is difficult to tell where one leaves off and another begins . Stilts and Shadow , on Pam's bed , appeared to be one cat -- rather large , as Siamese cats go , and , to be sure , having two heads and two tails . On the other hand , they , or it , seemed to have no legs whatever . Pamela North said , `` Hi '' , to her cats , and added that proper cats met their humans at the door . Of four dark brown ears , one twitched slightly at this . `` All right '' , Pam said . `` I know it isn't dinnertime '' . But at this the one too-large cat suddenly became two cats , stretching . Shadow , the more talkative , began at once to talk , her voice piteous . Stilts , a more direct cat , leaped from the bed and trotted briskly toward the kitchen . Shadow looked surprised , wailed , and trotted after her . The hell it isn't dinnertime , two waving tails told Pam North . It was not , whatever tale was told by tails . Martha presumably would cope . She might be firm . It was most unlikely that she would be firm . They want to be fat cats , Pam thought , and lighted a cigarette and leaned back on a chaise and considered pulling her thoughts together . After a time , it occurred to her that her thoughts were not worth the trouble . A vague feeling that Anthony Payne had had it coming was hardly a thought and was , in any event , reprehensible . Had Faith Constable's explanation of her confidence , so uninvited , been a little thin ? ? That was more like a thought , but not a great deal more . Had that tall dark boy , carrying trays too heavy for him , found what he might have considered adulation of a man he probably hated more than he could bear ? ? And possessed himself -- how ? ? -- of a rifle and killed ? ? Pam found she had no answers ; ; had only a hope . The poor kid -- the poor , frail kid . Some people have luck and some have no luck and that , whatever people who prefer order say , is the size of it . The poor , unlucky -- The telephone rang . Pam realized , to her surprise , that she had been almost dozing . At four o'clock in the afternoon . Two martinis for lunch -- that was the trouble . I ought to remember . Don't pretend . You do remember . You just -- `` Hello ? ? Yes , this is she ? ? What '' ? ? The voice had music in it . Even with words coming too fast , they came on the music of the voice . `` I said I would '' , Pam said . `` They won't talk about who gave the information . Not unless they have to . They don't , Mrs. Constable . Not unless they have '' -- She was interrupted . `` Call this a cry for help '' , Faith Constable said . `` Through a door conveniently unlocked '' , Madden supplemented . `` That damn door '' , said the police chief . `` A gift horse to be viewed with suspicion '' . Madden's dark face wore a meditative look . `` If there was collusion between an outside murderer and a member of the household it would be an elementary precaution to check on the door later . And it makes a very poor red herring for an inside job . Much better to break a cellar window '' . `` Don't forget , there was the hope it would pass for a natural death '' , Pauling reminded him . `` Well , with a house as big as that there must be at least one cellar window that wouldn't be noticed right away unless there was a police investigation '' . `` Yeah . And a pane of glass isn't hard to '' -- The telephone interrupted him . He scooped up the receiver and said , `` Police chief '' , into the mouthpiece , and then , `` Oh yes , Mr. Benson . I was hoping I'd hear from you today '' . With his free hand he pulled a pad and pencil toward him and began to make notes as he listened , saying , `` Uh-huh '' and `` I see '' at intervals . At last he said , `` Well , thank you for calling , Mr. Benson . Although there was no doubt in my mind and we've been handling it as one I'm glad to have it made official '' . He hung up . `` Coroner '' , he said to Madden . `` He's just heard from the pathologist who says Mrs. Meeker apparently died from suffocation '' . Pauling looked at his notes . `` Many minute hemorrhages in the lungs ; ; particles of lint and thread in the mouth and nostrils . Scrapings from the bed linen identical with the lint and thread found in the nasal and oral cavities . No other cause of death apparent . Trachea clear of mucus and foreign objects . Brain examined for thrombosis , clot or hemorrhage . No signs of these , no gross hemorrhage of lungs , heart , brain or stomach '' . He paused . `` That's about it . Oh , the time of death . The duration of the digestive process varies , the pathologist says , but the empty stomach and the findings in the upper gastrointestinal tract indicate that Mrs. Meeker died several hours after her seven-o'clock dinner . Probably around midnight , give or take an hour either way '' . Pauling paused again . `` So there it is '' , he said . `` Not your problem , of course , unless Johnston and the murderer are one and the same '' . They discussed this possibility . However likely it was , Pauling said , he couldn't limit himself to it . He had to look for other prospects , other motives until more conclusive evidence pointing to Johnston came to light . Madden , with his investigation centered on the fraud , said that tomorrow he would go to the Bronx bank through which Mrs. Meeker's checks to Johnston had cleared . Arthur Williams had to be located , they agreed . He might have been in collusion with Johnston on the fraud ; ; he might be Mrs. Meeker's murderer or have played some part in her death . This was Madden's suggestion ; ; the police chief shook his head over it . If Arthur Williams was involved in the fraud or the murder , then he too had another identity . No one the Medfield police had questioned professed to know any more about him than about Johnston . Scholarship applicant ? ? Pauling looked doubtful . Madden explained that he was thinking of an application sent directly to Mrs. Meeker . Then he asked to use the phone and called Brian Thayer , who said that he was just leaving to keep a lunch date but would be home by two o'clock . Madden said that he would see him at two and made another call , this one to Mrs. Meeker's lawyers . Mr. Hohlbein was out for the day , but Mr. Garth would be free at one-thirty . The secretary's tone indicated that an appointment at such short notice was a concession for which Madden should be duly grateful . He inferred that Hohlbein and Garth were high-priced lawyers . He had lunch with Pauling . Promptly at one-thirty he entered Hohlbein and Garth's elegant suite of offices in Medfield's newest professional building . He disliked Garth on sight , conservative clothes and haircut , smile a shade too earnestly boyish for a man who must be well into his thirties , handclasp too consciously quick and firm . Youngish man on the make , Madden labeled him , and was ready to guess that in a correct , not too pushing fashion , the junior partner of the firm had political ambitions ; ; that Mrs. Garth would be impeccably suitable as the wife of a rising young lawyer ; ; that there were three children , two boys and a girl ; ; that she was active in the Woman's Club and he in Lions , Rotary , and Jaycee ; ; and finally , that neither of them had harbored an unorthodox opinion since their wedding day . Madden knew that he could be completely wrong about all this , but also knew that he would go right on disliking Garth . Garth was prepared to be helpful in what he referred to with fastidious distaste as this unfortunate Johnston affair , which would not , he said more than once , have ever come about if Mrs. Meeker had only seen fit to consult Mr. Hohlbein or him about it . Madden regretted not being able to find fault with so true a statement . He asked to see a copy of Mrs. Meeker's will . Garth brought one out . The date , October 8 , 1957 , immediately caught the inspector's eye . `` Fairly recent '' , he remarked . `` Was she in the habit of making new wills '' ? ? `` Oh no . She had reason to change the one she made right after Mr. Meeker's death . Her estate had grown considerably . She wanted to make a more equitable distribution of it among the groups that would benefit the most ; ; particularly the scholarship fund . At the time the will was drawn Mr. Hohlbein mentioned to me how mentally alert she seemed for her age , knowing just what changes she wanted made and so forth '' . Garth hesitated . `` Mr. Hohlbein and I have noticed some lapses since , though . Most of them this past year , I'd say . Even two or three years ago I doubt that she'd have become involved in this unfortunate Johnston affair . She'd have consulted us , you see . She always did before , and showed the utmost confidence in whatever we advised '' . The inspector nodded , doubting this . Mrs. Meeker hadn't struck him as ready to seek anyone's advice , least of all Garth's . With her sharp tongue she'd have cut his pompousness to ribbons . It would have been Hohlbein who handled her affairs . Madden settled back to read the will . He skimmed over the millions that went to Meeker Park , Medfield Hospital , the civic center , the Public Health Nursing Association , the library , and so on , pausing when he came to the scholarship fund . Two millions were added to what had been set aside for it in Mrs. Meeker's lifetime , and the proviso made that as long as Brian Thayer continued to discharge his duties as administrator of the fund to the satisfaction of the board of trustees ( hereinafter appointed by the bank administering the estate ) he was to be retained in his present capacity at a salary commensurate with the increased responsibilities enlargement of the fund would entail . A splendid vote of confidence in Thayer , Madden reflected . Tenure , too . Very nice for him . He went on to personal bequests , a list of names largely unknown to him . Twenty-five thousand to each of the great-nieces in Oregon ( not much to blood relatives out of millions ) ten thousand to this friend and that , five thousand to another ; ; to Brian Thayer , the sum of ten thousand dollars ; ; to the Pecks , ten thousand each ; ; to Joan Sheldon the conditional bequest of ten thousand to be paid to her in the event that she was still in Mrs. Meeker's employ at the time of the latter's death . ( No additional five thousand for each year after Joan's twenty-first birthday ; ; Mrs. Meeker hadn't got around to taking care of that . ) Too bad , Madden thought . Joan Sheldon had earned the larger bequest . Mr. Hohlbein was left twenty thousand , Garth ten . There were no other names Madden recognized . Arthur Williams's might well have been included , he felt . Mrs. Meeker had spent a small fortune on a search for him but had made no provision for him in her will if he should be found after her death , and had never mentioned his name to her lawyers . Madden took up this point with Garth , who shrugged it off . `` Old people have their idiosyncrasies '' . `` This one came a bit high at thirty thousand or more . `` Well , she had a number of them where money was concerned '' , Garth said . `` Sometimes we'd have trouble persuading her to make tax-exempt charitable contributions , and I've known her to quarrel with a plumber over a bill for fixing a faucet ; ; the next moment she'd put another half million into the scholarship fund or thirty thousand into something as impractical as this unfortunate Johnston affair . There was no telling how she'd react to spending money '' . Madden inquired next about the audit of the scholarship fund . There was an annual audit , Garth informed him . No discrepancies or shortages had ever been found . Brian Thayer was a thoroughly honest and competent administrator . His salary had reached the ten thousand mark . His expenses ran another four or five thousand . The lawyer didn't know him very well although he saw him occasionally at some dinner party -- Thayer , like himself , Madden reflected , was the extra man so prized by hostesses -- and found him easy enough to talk to . But he didn't play golf , didn't seem to belong to any local clubs -- his work took him away a lot , of course -- which probably accounted for his tendency to keep to himself . Garth's glance began to flicker to his watch . He said that he had already told the police chief that he didn't know what insurance man had recommended Johnston to Mrs. Meeker . He would offer no theory to account for her murder . The whole thing , his manner conveyed , was so far outside the normal routine of Hohlbein and Garth that it practically demanded being swept under the rug . No doubt Mrs. Meeker had snubbed him many a time and he felt no grief over her passing . Even so , Madden's dislike of the suave , correct lawyer deepened . It would be all right with him , he decided , if his investigation of the fraud , with its probable by-product of murder , led to Garth's door . Motive ? ? Ten-thousand-dollar bequest . At first glance , not much of a motive for a man of his standing ; ; but for all his air of affluence , who could tell what his private financial picture was ? ? The inspector knew as he left that this was wishful thinking . Nevertheless , he made a mental note to look into Garth's financial background . Brian Thayer had a downtown address . He lived in an apartment house not over three or four years old , a reclaimed island of landscaped brick and glass on the fringe of the business district . He occupied a two-bedroom apartment on the fourth floor , using the second bedroom as his office . Airy and bright , the apartment was furnished with good modern furniture , rugs , and draperies . Done by a professional decorator , Madden thought , and somehow as impersonal , as unremarkable as its occupant . In Dunston the rent would run close to two hundred a month ; ; in Medfield , perhaps twenty-five less , not all of it paid by Thayer , who could charge off one room on his expense account . He took Madden into the room he used as an office . It contained a desk , files , a typewriter on a stand , and two big leather armchairs . A newspaper open at stock-market reports lay on one of them . Thayer folded it up and offered a drink . The inspector declined . To begin the interview , he asked if Thayer , with more time to think it over , could add to what he had said the other day about Johnston . Thayer shook his head . `` It's all I think about , too . That and her death . It's still unbelievable that it was murder . For all her domineering ways , I can't conceive of her having had a deadly enemy '' . `` Dammit , Phil , are you trying to wreck my career ? ? Because that's what you're doing -- wrecking it , wrecking it , wrecking it '' ! ! Griffith had confronted Hoag on the building's front steps -- Hoag had been permitted no further -- and backed him against a wrought-iron railing . His rage had built up as he made his way here from the second floor , helped by the quantity of champagne he had consumed . Hoag said , `` I didn't send for you , Leigh . I want the captain in charge . Where is he '' ? ? `` Phil , for God's sake , go away . The undersecretary's in there . I told you there's nothing between Midge and me , nothing . It's all in your mind '' . A couple of sobs escaped him , followed by a sentiment that revealed his emotional state . `` Why , I'm not fit to touch the hem of her garment '' . `` Leigh , get a grip on yourself . It's not about you or Midge . I have some security information about the prime minister '' . Griffith looked at him suspiciously through red-rimmed eyes . `` Not about me ? ? You mean it , Phil ? ? You wouldn't pull my leg , old man ? ? I did get you on the platform this morning '' . `` I'm not pulling your leg . Will you call that captain '' ? ? `` No use , he won't come '' . He peered closely at Hoag in the gathering darkness . `` What happened to your head '' ? ? `` I was hit -- knocked out . Now will you get him '' ? ? `` He says I'm to take the message '' . He stared at Hoag drunkenly . `` Who'd hit you in the head '' ? ? `` It doesn't matter . You get back to the captain and tell him this : Somebody's going to take a shot at the prime minister , and Mahzeer is in on the plot . Tell him under no circumstances to trust the prime minister with Mahzeer '' . Griffith said , `` That's impossible . Mahzeer's the ambassador '' . `` Nevertheless it's true '' . `` Impossible '' . Griffith was trying to clear his head of the champagne fuzz that encased it . `` I'll show you how wrong you are . Mahzeer and the prime minister are alone right now '' . He nodded triumphantly . `` So that proves it '' ! ! Hoag looked terrified . `` Where are they '' ? ? `` Where'd you expect , the john ? ? Mahzeer's office '' . `` Where is that '' ? ? `` Facing us , two flights up . Look , old man , you can't go up . They won't even let you in the front door . So why don't you be a good boy and '' -- Hoag grabbed him by the shoulders . `` Listen to me , Leigh . If you want to spend another day in the State Department -- another day -- you get in there and tell that captain what I told you '' . He bit out the words . `` And you know I can do it '' . Griffith raised placating hands . `` Easy does it , Phil . I was just going . I'm on my way '' . He turned and fled into the house and made his way up the marble stairs without once looking back . On the second landing he paused to look for Docherty , didn't see him , and accepted a glass of champagne . He took several large swallows , recollected that Docherty had gone up another flight , and decided he would be wise to cover himself by finding him . The way Hoag was , no telling what he might say or do . He finished his champagne and climbed uncertainly to the next landing . At the top a uniformed officer blocked further progress . `` Yes , what is it '' ? ? He asked . `` I want Captain Docherty '' . He spotted Docherty coming out of a room at the far end of the corridor and called to him . Docherty said , `` It's okay , Bonfiglio , let him by '' . They walked toward each other . `` Well '' ? ? Griffith said , `` Hoag told me to tell you '' -- he waited until they were close ; ; it was hideously embarrassing -- `` not to let the prime minister be alone with Mahzeer '' . Griffith looked half-crocked to the captain ; ; it would be just like him . `` Why not '' ? ? `` He claims Mahzeer's in a plot to kill the P.M. '' . Docherty went taut : was it possible ? ? Could the ambassador himself be the man on this side the prime minister feared ? ? Not possible , he thought ; ; the prime minister knew who his enemy was here ; ; he wasn't going to allow himself to be led meekly to the slaughter . And if by some wild chance Mahzeer was the man , he wouldn't dare try anything now -- not after Docherty had looked in on the two of them to see that all was well . Docherty was damned if he would make a fool of himself again the way he had earlier over the laundry truck . One more muddleheaded play like that one and they'd be leading him away . Still , this had to be checked out . `` Where'd your friend Hoag get his information '' ? ? He asked . `` Haven't the faintest , Captain '' . `` Would you mind sending him up here ? ? I'd like to talk to him '' . Troubled , he continued along the corridor , poking his head into the next office for a careful look around . But Hoag had not stayed on the front steps when Griffith disappeared into the building . He was unwilling to rely on Griffith's carrying his message , and he had no confidence the police would act on it . If Mahzeer was alone with the prime minister he could be arranging his execution while Hoag stood out here shivering in the darkening street . He would have to do something on his own . But what ? ? The door opened and three men and a woman in a sari swept past him and down the stairs . In the lighted interior he saw other men and women struggling into their wraps . These were the early departures ; ; in half an hour the reception would be over . If Mahzeer was planning to set up the prime minister for Muller he would have to do it in the next few minutes . Hoag descended the stone steps to the street and looked up at the building . Wide windows with many small leaded panes swept across the upper stories . On the second floor he saw the animated faces of the party guests ; ; the scene looked like a Christmas card . On the third floor one of the two windows was lighted ; ; it was framed in maroon drapes , and no faces were visible . This would be Mahzeer's office . He and the prime minister would be back from the window , seated at Mahzeer's desk ; ; they would be going over papers Mahzeer had saved as excuse for just such a meeting . In a minute , or five minutes , the business would be done ; ; Mahzeer would stand up , the prime minister would follow . Mahzeer would direct the prime minister's attention to something out the window and would guide him forward and then step to one side . The single shot would come ; ; Hoag would carry its sound to his grave . Mahzeer , of course , would be desolate . How was he to suspect that an assassin had been lurking somewhere across the street waiting for just such a chance ? ? Hoag turned . Where across the street ? ? Where was Muller waiting with the rifle ? ? Narrow four-story buildings ran the length of the block like books tightly packed on a shelf . Most of them could be eliminated ; ; Muller's would have to be one of the half dozen almost directly opposite . The legation was generously set back from the building line ; ; if the angle of fire were too great the jutting buildings on either side would interfere . Would the shot come from a roof ? ? He ran his eye along the roof copings ; ; almost at once a figure bulked up . But dully glinting on the dark form were the buttons and badge of a policeman . With a cop patrolling the road Muller would have to be inside a building -- if he was here at all , and not waiting for the prime minister somewhere between this street and the terminal building at La Guardia Airport . Hoag crossed the narrow street , squeezing between parked cars to reach the sidewalk . From this side he could see farther into the legation's third-story window , but he saw no faces ; ; the room's occupants were still seated or they had been called into the hallway by an alarmed police captain . If only the latter were true . He walked rapidly along the buildings scanning their facades : one was a club -- that was out ; ; two others he ruled out because all their windows were lighted . That left three , possibly four , one looking much like the next . He climbed the steps of the first and opened the door to the vestibule . He quickly closed it again . He had assumed that all these buildings had been divided into apartments , but this one , from a glance at the hall furnishings , was obviously still a functioning town house , and its owners were in residence ; ; that made it doubtful as the hiding place of a man whose plans had to be made in advance . He went on to the next building and found what he expected -- the mingled cooking aromas of a public vestibule . On one wall was the brass front of a row of mailboxes ; ; there were six apartments . Now what ? ? The names on the mailboxes meant nothing to him . This was senseless -- he had no idea what to look for . He peered in the boxes themselves ; ; all were empty except one , and that one was jammed with letters and magazines . The occupants of Apartment Number 3 were probably away for a few days , and not likely to return on a Friday . Had Muller made the same deduction ? ? Muller was attracted to the lore of mailboxes . He opened the inner door ; ; the cooking odors were stronger -- all over the city , at this hour , housewives would be fussing over stoves . He climbed , as quickly as he could urge his body , up the two unbroken flights to the third floor , pulling himself along on a delicate balustrade , all that remained of the building's beauty . He paused on the landing to steady his breathing and then bent to examine the single door by the light of the weak bulb overhead . Now he was certain : the lock had not yielded to Muller's collection of keys ; ; fresh scars showed that the door had been prized open . It had been shut again , but the lock was broken ; ; he noted with a thrill of fear that the door moved under his touch . What was he to do now ? ? He had thought no further than finding Muller . He realized now he had more than half hoped he wouldn't find him -- that Muller would not be here , that the attempt would be scheduled for somewhere beyond Hoag's control . He could not break in on an armed man . He would have to climb back down to the street and signal a cop . Was there time ? ? His thoughts were scattered by the sharp report of a rifle from the other side of the door . Hoag pushed open the door : at the far end of the long dark room Muller was faintly silhouetted against the window , the rifle still raised ; ; he stood with his feet apart on a kitchen table he had dragged to the sill . He turned his head to the source of the disturbance and instantly back to the window and his rifle sight , dismissing Hoag for the moment with the same contempt he had shown in their encounter at Hoag's apartment . Hoag stretched his left hand to the wall and fumbled for the switch : evil flourishes in the dark . The room was bathed in light at the instant Muller's second shot came . Muller , nakedly exposed at the bright window like a deer pinned in a car's headlights , threw down the rifle and turned to jump from the table ; ; his face wore a look of outrage . A shot caught him and straightened him up in screaming pain ; ; a following volley of shots shattered glass , ripped the ceiling , and sent him lurching heavily from the table . He was dead before his body made contact with the floor . Hoag stumbled back into the hall , leaned against the wall , and started to retch . After Captain Docherty sent Arleigh Griffith for Hoag he was able to complete his detailed inspection of the third floor and to receive a report from his man covering the floors above before Griffith returned , buoyed up by a brief stop for another glass of champagne . The safe at Ingleside District Station stands next to the gum machine in a narrow passageway that leads to Captain Harris's office ( to the left ) , the lieutenant's office ( farther along and to the left ) and the janitor's supply closet ( straight ahead ) . The safe is a repository for three dead flashlight batteries , a hundred and fifty unused left-hand fingerprint cards , a stack of unsold Policemen's Ball tickets from last year , and thirty-seven cents in coins and stamps . Gun set the captain's fifth of Hiram Walker inside the safe before he reported to Lt. Killpath , though he knew that Killpath's ulcer prevented him from making any untoward incursion on Herman Wolff's gift . It was more a matter of tact , and also it was none of Killpath's goddam business . He walked up to the lieutenant's office , leaned wearily against the gun rack that housed four rifles and a gas gun nobody remembered having used and a submachine gun that was occasionally tried out on the Academy Range . He stared at the clerk who sat at a scarred and ancient fumed-oak desk stuffing envelopes . `` Where's the Lieut '' ? ? The clerk wagged his head toward the captain's office . Gun went to the connecting door , which was open , and stood at attention while Orville Torrence Killpath , in full uniform , finished combing his hair . The lieutenant's sparse brown hair was heavily pomaded , and as Killpath raked the comb through it , it stuck together in thatches so that it looked like umbrella ribs clinging to his pink skull . The lieutenant eyed Gun's reflection in the mirror over the washbowl and then glanced back at his own face , moving the comb methodically around his head . Leave me alone , Gun thought . Fight with Sam Schaeffer , fight with the whole damned Bureau . But leave me alone . Because I'm looking for the son of a bitch that killed that old man , and I'm going to get him . If you just leave me to hell alone , Lieutenant . Killpath peered through half-closed lids at his reflection , thrust up his chin in a gesture of satisfaction and about-faced . Gun waited for Killpath to sit down behind the desk near the window . He sat stiff-backed in a chair that did not swivel , though it was obvious to Gun that Killpath felt his position as acting captain plainly merited a swivel chair . The desk before him was in no better repair than the rest of the furniture crowded into the room , including wooden file cabinets with some of their pulls yanked off and a wardrobe stained with the roof seepage of countless seasons . Killpath pulled one thin leg up , clamping his arms around the shinbone to press his knee into an incredibly scrawny gut . It was the posture which the men had come to recognize as that of Killpath defying his ulcer . He put his chin on his kneecap , stretching his neck like that of a turkey on a chopping block , and stared wordlessly at his sergeant . Gun waited . The 7:45 bell rang and he could hear the outside doors bang shut , closing in the assembled day watch . Finally , Orville intoned through his hawk nose , `` We can't have people running in any time they please , Sergeant '' . `` No , sir '' . `` Running in , running out . Can't have it . Makes for confusion and congestion '' . He rocked back in the chair , knee locked against stomach , his beady eyes fixed on Matson . He was silent again , possibly listening to the sounds in the squadroom . Roll was being called . Gun cleared his throat . Killpath said , `` You were expected to report to my office twenty minutes ago , Sergeant . That's not getting all the juice out of the orange , now is it '' ? ? `` No , sir '' . Then Killpath smiled . Gun knew that nothing but aces back to back would give the lieutenant an ulcer and a smile at the same time . The day-watch platoon commander , Lt. Rinker , was calling out the beat assignments , but Matson couldn't make the names mean anything . `` I called the station at three this morning '' , Killpath's nasal voice pronounced . `` Do you have any idea who might have been in charge at the time '' ? ? `` Sergeant Vaughn , sir '' . `` Now , now , you're just guessing , Sergeant '' . He smiled thinly , savoring his joke . `` What if I said nobody was here but a couple of patrolmen '' ? ? `` Sir , Vaughn knows better than to leave the station without a relief . He must have '' -- `` He let a patrolman take over the duties of the station keeper . Now that's not regulation , is it '' ? ? `` No , sir '' . `` But you didn't know a thing about it , did you '' ? ? Killpath leaned forward ; ; his foot slipped off the chair and he put it back again , frowning now . `` That's not taking one's command with a responsible attitude , Matson '' . Gun told himself that the old bastard was a fool . But stupidity was no consolation when it had rank . `` I was out in the district , sir '' . `` Oh , yes . So I have heard '' . He stretched a pale hand out to the scattered papers on his desk . `` I might point out that your inability to report to my office this morning when you were instructed to do so has not ah limited my knowledge of your activities as you may have hoped '' . He took up a white sheet of paper , dark with single-spaced data . A car pulled into the driveway outside the window . Gun knew it was Car 12 , the wagon , returned from delivering Ingleside's drunk-and-disorderlies to the City Jail . But for some fool reason he couldn't remember which men he'd put on the transfer detail . He stared at the report in Killpath's hand , sure it was written by Accacia -- just as sure as if he'd submitted it in his scrawled longhand . He sucked in his breath and kept quiet while Killpath laid down the sheet again , wound the gold-wire stems of his glasses around his ears and then , eying the report as it lay before him on the desk , intoned , `` Acting Lieutenant Gunnar Matson one failed to see that the station keeper was properly relieved two absented himself throughout the entire watch without checking on the station's activities or the whereabouts of his section sergeants three permitted members of the Homicide Detail of the Inspector's Bureau to arrogate for their own convenience a patrolman who was thereby prevented from carrying on his proper assignment four failed to notify the station commander Acting Captain O. T. Killpath of a homicide occurring in the district five frequented extralegal establishments known as after-hours spots for purposes of an unofficial and purportedly social nature and six '' -- he leaned back and peeled off his glasses `` -- failed to co-operate with the Acting Captain by returning promptly when so ordered . What have you to say to that , Sergeant '' ? ? Killpath sailed the paper across the desk , but Matson didn't pick it up or even glance at it . `` Well '' ? ? `` I didn't think Accacia knew so many big words , Lieutenant '' . Killpath licked his lips . `` Patrolman Accacia is an alert and conscientious law-enforcement officer . I don't think his diligence mitigates your negligence , Matson '' . `` Negligence , hell '' ! ! Gun held his breath a moment , pushing the volume and pitch of his voice down under the trapdoor in his throat . `` Sir . I would have been negligent and a goddam lousy cop to boot , if I'd sat around this station all night when somebody got away with murder in my district . It's too bad I didn't call you , and it's too bad I let Schaeffer use Accacia when he could have had a boy who'd be glad to learn something of Homicide procedure . But I'm not one damned bit sorry I went out to question the people I know in the places they hang around , and '' -- `` Let's not push our patience beyond the danger line , Sergeant '' , Killpath nasaled . `` I shouldn't like to have to write you up for insubordination as well as dereliction of duty '' . Gun stiffened , his hands balling into fists at his sides . He clamped his jaws to keep the fury from spilling out . An argument with Orville Torrence Killpath was as frustrating and as futile as a cap pistol on a firing range . Killpath leaned forward again , rocked comfortably with his arms still wrapped around one knee . `` Let's just remember , Sergeant , that we must all carry our own umbrella . A district station can't run smoothly , unless '' -- He interrupted himself , looking around Gun at the doorway . `` Morning , Lieutenant Rinker '' . `` Sorry , Orville . I thought you hadn't come in yet '' . `` I've been here for some time '' . He stood up , cocked his head and eyed Gun coldly . `` The sergeant is just leaving '' . It had come as no great surprise to Matson that the hot water in the showers didn't work , that Loren Severe had thrown up all over the stairs , or that some thieving bastard of a cop had walked off with his cigarettes . It was the best he could hope for on a watch that had ended with a session in Killpath's office . Now , as he passed the open counter that divided the assembly room from the business office , he nodded and said good night to the station keeper and his clerks , not stopping to hear the day-watch playback of his chewing out . Not that he gave a damn what the grapevine sent out about Killpath's little speech on the comportment of platoon commanders . He just didn't want to talk about it . If the acting captain wanted his acting lieutenant to sit on his ass around the station all night , Killpath would just have to go out and drag Gun back by the heels once an hour ; ; because he'd be damned if he was going to be a mid-watch pencil-pusher just to please his ulcerated pro-tem captain . At the doorway he squinted up at the gray morning overcast and patted his jacket pockets for the cigarettes , remembering then that he'd left them at the Doughnuttery . He could pick up another pack on his way home , if he were going home . But even before he started across the oiled road to his Plymouth , parked in the lot under the cypress trees across from the station , he knew that he wasn't going home . Not yet . It was nine o'clock in the morning : the hour which , like a spade turning clods of earth , exposed to the day a myriad of busy creatures that had lain dormant in the quiet night . Mission Street at this hour was populated by a whole community that Gun could not have seen on his tour of duty -- the neighborhood that had known Urbano Quintana by day . Then Sol Phillips had purchased the Alliance Furniture Mart seventeen years ago . It was professedly worth three thousand dollars in stock and good will , and the name was written in gold in foot-high letters across each of the two display windows . On the right window , at eye level , in smaller print but also in gold , was Gonzalez , Prop. , and under that , Se Habla Espanol . Mr. Phillips took a razor to Gonzalez , Prop. , but left the promise that Spanish would be understood because he thought it meant that Spanish clientele would be welcome . Language was no problem anyway ; ; Mr. Phillips had only to signal from his doorway to summon aid from the ubiquitous bilingual children who played on the sidewalks of Mission Street . Aside from the fact that business was slow this time of year and his one salesgirl was not the most enterprising , Mr. Phillips had no worries at all , and he said as much to Gun Matson , who sat across from him in civilian clothes , on a Jiffy-Couch-a-Bed , mauve velour , $79.89 nothing-down special ! ! `` She's honest as the day '' , Mr. Phillips said , and added , `` Mr. Gunnar , I can say this to you : Beebe is a little too honest . You can't tell a customer how much it's going to cost him to refinance his payments before he even signs for a loan on the money down ! ! A time plan is a mere convenience , you understand , and when '' -- He interrupted himself , smiling . `` I put her in lamps . That way I don't lose so much '' . `` Why don't you just hire somebody else '' ? ? `` She says she has to finish a story '' . He shrugged . `` I asked her why she couldn't do it tomorrow , but it seems the muse is working good tonight and she's afraid to let it go '' . Casey made some comment , but his mind was busy as he considered the man . His name was George Needham and he , too , had come from a good family . He was perhaps thirty-two , nicely set up , with light brown hair that had a pronounced wave . He was always well groomed and well tailored , and he had that rich man's look which was authentic enough and came from two good prep schools and a proper university . An only child , he had done all the things that young men do who have been born to money and social position until his father double-crossed him by dying broke . Since then he had worked at this and that , though some said his main interest was gambling . All this went through Casey's mind in the first instant , but what held his interest was the fact that these two should be together at all . For he had understood that Betty had been engaged to a boy named Barry Jenkins . She had grown up with young Jenkins , and he had heard that they had been at the point of getting married at least twice . He wanted to ask her about Jenkins now , but he knew he couldn't do so in Needham's presence . And so , still wondering and a little perplexed , he grinned at the girl and spoke lightly to make sure that she would know he was kidding . `` Where did you pick him up '' ? ? `` Oh , I've known him quite a while '' . She glanced at her companion fondly . `` Haven't I , George '' ? ? `` I've been after her for years '' , Needham said , `` but I've never been able to get anywhere until the last few days '' . The girl's eyes were softly shining as she reached out and touched Casey's hand . `` Can I tell you a secret ? ? We're going to get married . Do you approve '' ? ? Casey kept his smile fixed , but some small inner disturbance was working on him as he thought again about Needham , who was eight or ten years older than the girl . He wondered whether Needham was going to swear off gambling and get a steady job or whether he was counting on the income from Betty's estate to subsidize him . None of this showed in his face , and he tried to keep his skepticism in hand . He made a point of frowning , of acting out the part of the fond father-confessor . `` I'll have to give it some thought '' , he said . `` You wouldn't want me to say yes without making sure his intentions are honorable , would you '' ? ? She made a face at him and then she laughed . `` Of course not '' . `` I'll get my references in order '' , Needham said , and though he spoke with a smile , Casey somehow got the idea that he was not particularly amused . `` Stop by any time , Casey '' . He stood up and touched the girl's arm . `` Come on , darling . If you're really serious about working on that story , I'd better take you home '' . Casey watched them go , still frowning absently and then dismissing the matter as he called for his check . As he went out he told Freddie the dinner was perfect , and when he got his hat and coat from Nancy Parks and put a fifty-cent piece in the slot , he told her to be sure that it went toward her dowry . A taxi took him back to the bar and grill where he had left his car , and a few minutes later he found a parking place across the street from his apartment . Because his mind had been otherwise occupied for the past couple of hours , he did not think to look and see if Jerry Burton's car was still there . In fact , he did not think about Jerry Burton at all until he entered his living room and closed the door behind him . Only then , when his glance focused on the divan and saw that it was empty , did he remember his earlier problem . Even from where he stood he could see the neatly folded blanket that he had spread over Burton , the pillow , the sheet of paper on top of it . Then he was striding across the room , his thoughts confused but the worry building swiftly inside him as he snatched up the note . Jack : Look in the wastebasket . I knew the only way I could beat you was to play possum , but it was a good try , kid , and I appreciate it . The wastebasket stood near the wall next to the divan , and the instant Casey picked it up he knew what had happened . The discarded papers inside were sodden , there was a glint of liquid at the bottom , and the smell of whisky was strong and distinct . He put the basket down distastefully , muttering softly and thoroughly disgusted with himself and his plan that had seemed so foolproof . For he remembered too well how he had brought back the loaded drinks to Burton and then returned to the kitchen to get weaker drinks for himself . For another second or two he gave in to the annoyance that was directed at himself ; ; then his mind moved on to be confronted by something far more serious , and as the thought expanded , the implications jarred him . It no longer mattered that Burton had outsmarted him . The important thing was that Burton had gone somewhere to meet a blackmailer with a gun in his pocket . And that gun was empty . Even before his mind had rounded out the idea , he thrust one hand into his trousers pocket and pulled out the six slugs he had taken from the revolver . He considered them with brooding eyes , brows bunched as his brain grappled with the problem and tried to find some solution . He said : `` The crazy fool '' , half aloud . He put the shells on the table , as though he could no longer bear to hold them . He thought : Where the hell could he have gone ? ? How can I find him ? ? There was no answer to this and he began to pace back and forth across the room , his imagination out of control . He tried to tell himself that maybe Burton had sobered up enough to get some sense . Maybe he only intended to scare the blackmailer , whoever he was , in which case an unloaded gun would be good enough . He thought of other possibilities , none of them satisfactory , and finally he began to think , to wonder if there was some way he could reach Burton . Then , as he turned toward the telephone , it rang shrilly to shatter the stillness in the room and he reached for it eagerly . `` Yeah '' , he said . `` Casey '' ? ? `` Yeah '' . `` Tony Calenda '' . Casey heard the voice distinctly and he knew who it was , but it took him a while to make the mental readjustment and control the disturbance inside his head . When he heard Calenda say : `` What about that picture you took this afternoon '' ? ? It still took him another few seconds to remember the job he had done for Frank Ackerly . `` What picture '' ? ? He demanded . `` You took a picture of me at the corner of Washington and Blake about three thirty this afternoon '' . `` Who says so '' ? ? `` One of my boys '' . Casey believed that much . Calenda was not the sort who walked around without one of his `` boys '' close at hand . `` So '' ? ? `` With my trial coming up in Federal Court next week I wouldn't want that picture published '' . `` Who says it's going to be published '' ? ? `` I wouldn't even want it to get around '' . Under normal circumstances Casey was a little fussy when people told him what to do with pictures he had taken . Even so , he generally listened and was usually reasonable to those who voiced their objections properly . Right now , however , he was still too worried about Jerry Burton , and the gun that had no bullets , and the story Burton had told him , to care too much about Tony Calenda . His nerves were getting a little ragged and his impatience put an edge in his voice . `` Look '' , he said . `` I was hired to take a picture . I took it . That's all I know about it and that's all I care '' . `` Maybe you'd better tell the guy who hired you what I said '' . `` You tell him '' . `` All right '' , Calenda said , his voice still quiet . `` But I meant what I said , Casey . If that picture gets around and I find out you had anything to do with it , I'm going to send a couple of my boys around to see you '' . `` You do that '' , Casey said . `` Just be sure to send your two best boys , Tony '' . He hung up with a bang , annoyed at himself for running off at the mouth like that but still terribly concerned with the situation he had helped to create . As soon as he could think logically again he reached for the telephone directory and found Jerry Burton's home number . He dialed it and listened to it ring ten times before he hung up . He called the bar and grill where he had picked Burton up that afternoon . When he was told that no one had seen Burton since then , he thought of three other places that were possibilities . Each time he got the same answer and in the end he gave up . By the time he had smoked three cigarettes he had calmed down . He had done all he could and that was that . And anyway Burton was not the kind of guy who would be likely to get in trouble even when he was drunk . He , Casey , had been scared for a while , but that had come mostly from the fact that he felt responsible . He should have stayed here and watched Burton . He didn't . So he made a mistake . So what ? ? He kept telling himself this as he went out to the kitchen to make a drink . Only then did he decide he didn't want one . He considered opening a can of beer but vetoed that idea too . Finally he went into the bedroom and sat down to take off his shoes . He had just finished unlacing the right one when the telephone rang again . When he snatched it up the voice that came to him was quick and urgent . `` Casey ? ? You don't know me but I know you . If you want a picture get to the corner of Adams and Clark just as fast as you can . If you hurry you might beat the headquarters boys '' . Casey heard the click of the distant receiver before he could open his mouth , and it took him no more than three seconds to make his decision . For over the years he had received many such calls . Some of them came from people who identified themselves . Some telephoned because he had done them a favor in the past . Others because they expected some sort of reward for the information . A few passed along a tip for the simple reason that they liked him and wanted to give him a break . Only an occasional tip turned out to be a phony , and , like the police , Casey had made a point of running down all such suggestions and he did not hesitate this time . He was in his car with his camera and equipment bag in less than two minutes , and it took him only three more to reach the corner , a block from Columbus Avenue . It was a district of small factories and loft buildings and occasional tenements , and he could see the police radio car as he rounded the corner and slammed on the brakes . He did not bother with his radio -- there would be time for that later -- but as he scrambled out on the pavement he saw the filling station and the public telephone booth and knew instantly how he had been summoned . The police car had pulled up behind a small sedan , its headlights still on . Slowly he pulled out the hand throttle until the boat was moving at little more than a crawl , and watched Elaine rapidly spin from one station to another , tune in the null , then draw in a line on the chart . `` We're out just a little too far . Make a 90 degree straight for shore '' . Poet came in , raising his eyebrows appreciatively as he saw Elaine . `` Now '' ? ? He asked . `` Pretty quick '' , she replied . `` Will you drop the anchor '' ? ? Poet nodded , swung below and a moment later emerged from the forward hatch where he picked up the anchor . The rock and roll music coming from the radio station suddenly faded as the boat coasted into the null on the Aj . `` Reverse '' , Elaine said , then peered through the loop of the RDF and waved to Poet . A second later she came behind the wheel and backed off the anchor line until it was set in the ocean floor . She cut the engines and slowly the cruiser swung around on the end of its lines until its bow was pointing into the wind and the cockpit faced toward the shore . Nick watched her somewhat enviously as she efficiently cut the engines , and started the auxiliary motor . Poet came up from below , wearing new bathing trunks . The price tag hung from the belt and he pulled it off as he entered the chartroom and looked at it curiously . Nick wondered if Elaine had bought them , but he said nothing . Nobody , he suddenly realized , was saying anything . It seemed as if they were all under a spell . There should be an excited conversation , for somewhere , directly below them , was a treasure lost for more than four hundred years . But instead of chatter there was a null , like on the radio direction finder . Once , in New York , he had gone flying with some friends in a small private airplane with a single engine . They had all been laughing , joking , when suddenly the engine had failed . No one had screamed . No one had prayed . All had fallen into a complete silence , listening to the wind whistle over the wings . The pilot had been good . He'd landed the plane on a small airstrip in Connecticut and as soon as the aircraft had coasted to a stop , everyone had burst into chatter at the same moment . There had been tension in the plane during the silent descent ; ; a tension similar to the one now . But in the plane there was a concrete reason for it . Now , at this moment , there should be none unless skin diving was much more dangerous than he had been led to believe . Yet tension existed . The same taut-nerved relationship as there had been between the passengers on the plane now strained at the three of them here on the boat . It hung over them like a cloud , its arrival as sudden as a cloud skidding over the sun . Silently , Elaine picked up her keys from the table and went out into the cockpit , Poet behind her , Nick trailing behind him . She threw back a cushion over one of the seats , unlocked a padlock on the chest beneath it , then presently straightened , holding a long knife and a wicked looking spear gun in her hand . Poet whistled softly as he looked at the gun . `` Hydraulic '' ? ? He asked . Elaine nodded . `` They are the best '' . She kicked the locker lid shut and replaced the cushion . `` They are the most efficient '' . `` And the deadliest '' , Poet commented as he buckled on his tank harness . `` Why do you need an arsenal '' ? ? Nick asked , apprehensively , staring at the weapon . `` It's quite possible there's more than codfish down there , man '' , Poet replied with a short , nervous laugh as he held the harness for Elaine . A moment later , moving awkwardly because of the swimming fins , she picked up the gun , handed the knife to Poet , then rolled off the transom of the boat , back first . Poet nodded to Nick and entered the water in a similar fashion . Another moment and they were out of sight , leaving behind only a string of bubbles as a clue to their whereabouts . For a while Nick followed the twisting course of the bubbles , wondering which set came from Elaine . They remained close together , their air trail wiggling like serpents traveling side by side . Eventually the bubbles became lost in the sparkle of the ocean surface , and he rolled over on his back . Clasping his hands behind his head , he stared at the blue sky . There was nothing quite like being alone on a boat on the ocean . Alfredo certainly must have enjoyed being alone . Next to the ocean , probably the loneliest spot was the desert . If Elaine's uncle had stuck to this desire for aloneness , he probably would still be alive . Yet Alfredo wanted money wanted money to roam through the deserts . And Graham wanted money probably to roam among the dice tables in Las Vegas . It was an odd combination a strange pair to stumble upon the wreck of the Trinidad . But Graham hadn't stumbled on it . Two to three weeks prior to the charter of the Virginia , Graham had been snooping around the San Luis Rey Mission . The small helicopter with its two steel skids churned offshore and Nick raised up to watch it heading south . That was a hell of a note , he thought . A couple couldn't even find a secluded spot anywhere on a beach to neck nowadays without someone swooping down upon them . If the character flying that thing had gone over San Clemente Island yesterday he would have had an eyeful . Off to the west a beautiful schooner slowly beat its way into the wind , headed on a tack toward San Clemente . Behind it a cabin cruiser drifted crossways in the small ground-swell , a lone fisherman in the chair aft . The fisherman was right in the middle of the Deep . Nick recalled stories that the two best fishing spots in Southern California were over the La Jolla Deep and the Redondo Deep , two spots where the ocean dropped off to fantastic depths almost from the shoreline . Someday , geologists had warned , the land on both sides of these deeps would fall into the ocean and no more La Jolla or Redondo Beach . Meanwhile , fishermen took advantage of them to pull up whoppers . Sometimes the fish exploded as they neared the surface because of the difference in pressure . Why , he wondered , had Elaine wanted him along on this trip ? ? He couldn't skindive , he couldn't run a boat , except on the open sea . He stood up , stretched , looked around for the bubbles , but could see none . Strolling down to the galley , he lit the butane under the coffee pot and when the brew was heated , poured himself a cup and went up to the chartroom . Turning on the hi-fi , he went back to the cockpit , stretched out on the cushions and listened to the music . Elaine and Poet returned together , popping up over the transom almost like dolphins breaking water . He sat up and watched as they pulled themselves over the stern . `` Any luck '' ? ? He asked . Poet shook his head , sliding his face mask up on his forehead . `` We're right on the edge of the Deep '' , Elaine said . Pulling off her face mask , she carefully placed the spear gun across the stern , then lifted her wet hair from her back and squeezed out the water . `` Which is a break as the area to search is less than a square mile '' , she added as she swung her legs over the transom . `` Any news '' ? ? `` Not a thing '' . He tossed her a towel , then repeated the service for Poet . `` Cigarette '' ? ? Elaine shook her head as she slipped out of her harness , but Poet nodded . His feet still hung over the stern of the transom , but as he reached for the smoke he raised them to swing them in . The fin on his foot caught on the moulding , throwing him off balance . His forearm smashed painfully into the narrow washboard and he grimaced as he grabbed his bruised limb with his other hand and rolled into the boat . `` Kee-reist '' ! ! The word hissed distinctly from Poet's lips as he struggled to his feet . Nick's body became rigid . Turning slowly he saw Poet in a brilliant glare of horror . Poet ! ! His face was still creased in pain as he studied the underside of his arm . Poet a murderer ? ? Turning quickly toward Elaine , Nick saw that she , too , stood in shocked surprise . The sudden silence was too silent . Instinctively aware of the charged atmosphere , Poet raised his head slowly , looking first at Elaine . She had caught the implication of the oath . Her face was frozen into the mask of a mannequin , her body absolutely motionless . And then Nick knew that all of them knew Elaine , himself and Poet . Elaine recovered first , so quickly that Nick thought he might have imagined her sudden reaction . `` Do you need a bandage '' ? ? She asked steadily . Poet rubbed his arm . `` It's like banging a shin '' , he said , his eyes lingered on Nick's face , then moved back to Elaine . `` Hurts like hell for a second , then it disappears '' . `` I'll get some ointment '' . Elaine turned and started toward the companionway . But her walk was too steady , too slow , telegraphing her fear . Nick sensed it . So did Poet . Springing like a cat , he leaped back , swooped up the spring gun and , whirling , pointed it toward the cabin . At the same instant , Nick hit the barrel and threw himself upon the smaller man . The gun fired next to his ear with a vicious whoosh like the first stroke of an old steam engine . At the same instant , Elaine screamed wildly , the sound ending abruptly as Nick went off the boat and into the water on top of the frantic , struggling Poet . The moment the sea closed over Nick , some atavistic sense warned him that he would survive in this alien element only if he did not panic . But the murderer to whom he clung had a tremendous advantage . The wide flippers on Poet's feet gave his legs incredible power , driving the two of them down into the water as they rolled over and over . Poet was the captured , arms pinioned to his side , and he twisted convulsively trying to escape . Poet would escape , Nick thought grimly , because he wore the apparatus which would keep him alive under water . But Nick would not let go . The rubber and glass face mask slipped from Poet's forehead , bounced painlessly off Nick's chin , then disappeared . Poet twisted again and Nick's knuckles scraped on the air tank , ripping off the skin . For a split second , Nick relaxed his grip and Poet's slippery body spun completely around before Nick could stop him , holding him now from the rear . Something flailed at the side of Nick's head as they rolled around and around . Suddenly Poet stopped struggling and the two of them hung suspended in the water , not rising , not sinking . A sharp pain lanced across Nick's chest and a bubble of air escaped from his tortured lungs , joining dozens of others that sailed lazily toward the surface like helium balloons rising into the sky . A black , snake-like object swayed eerily in front of him , spewing bubbles from its flat cobra head . The air hose was free ! ! The discovery struck Nick like a blow . Desperately , Nick flashed one hand up , catching Poet's neck in the bend of his elbow . At the same instant , he grabbed the loose , writhing hose with his other hand and bit down on the hard rubber mouthpiece . Instinctively he exhaled through his nose then sucked in the air from the hose . At once the excruciating pain in his chest stopped and he was seized with a sudden , wild exultation . As if this was a signal , Poet abruptly began to thrash the water and the quick movement slowly made them sink through the water . Relentlessly , Nick held on , sucking on the hose , inhaling the air that belonged to Poet . Poet was not fighting Nick now . Harbor Point sticks out into the ocean like the fat neck of a steamer clam . It's a rich village but not much for action -- too many solid residents , not enough tourists or working stiffs . It's at the far end of the county and the last time I came here was for a hit and run manslaughter -- about seven months ago . Chief Bob Moore looked his same hick-self ; ; a man mountain running to lard in his middle-age . Seeing me he said with real surprise , `` Well , well , ain't we honored ! ! Hardly expected the head of County Homicide up for this murder . You sure climbed fast , Jed . Rookie investigator last summer and now it's Inspector Jed . Took me 19 years to become Chief of our three man police force . Proves a college education pays off '' . His sarcasm was followed by a stupid grin of his thick mouth and bad teeth . `` I guess it helps '' , I said , paying no attention to his ribbing . `` Never could figure out why you ever wanted to be a cop , Jed . You're not only young but well , you don't even look like a police officer . A runt with narrow shoulders and that brush haircut hell , you'd pass for a juvenile delinquent of the hotrod set . In my day the first requirement for a cop was to look like the law , big and tough . Man , when my 275 pounds and six-four comes along , why it's the same as another badge . When I say move , a guy moves '' ! ! `` Don't worry about my being tough , Moore . Also , it's far too early in the day for corny lines like the bigger they come You've had your gassy lecture , let's get to work . Who was the murdered woman Mrs. Buck '' ? ? `` Widow , nice sort of woman . Comfortably fixed . Ran a fair-sized farm . Came to the Harbor as a bride and Don't worry Jed , this one is in the bag . I know the killer , have the only road off the peninsula covered '' . `` Yeah , passed your road block as I drove in '' , I said , sitting on his polished desk . Although Bob dressed like a slob , he kept a neat office . `` Okay , what happened '' ? ? `` About nine this morning Mrs. Buck phones me she's having trouble with one of her farm hands -- money trouble . Colored fellow named Tim Williams -- only hand she has working for her now . Tim come with the migratory workers that follow the crops up from the South last year , but Tim and his wife settled here . Never had no trouble with him before , thought he was a hard worker , hustling around to get a full week's work . Anyway , Julia asks me to . '' `` Julia '' ? ? `` Come on , Inspector , look alive . Julia Buck , the deceased '' , Moore said , slipping me his smug , idiot-grin again . `` Julia asks me to come out at once . But she didn't sound real alarmed you know , like there was any immediate danger . I got there at 9:47 A.M. , found her strangled . I would have come sooner if I'd known . No doubt about Tim being the killer -- I have a witness . Don't know why the County had to send anybody up here . Told them I can handle this '' . `` Yeah , seems you have a nice package , with all the strings tied . Who's '' ? ? `` I'll collar Tim before night '' . `` Who's your witness '' ? ? `` Julia had -- has -- an old Indian woman cooking for her -- Nellie Harris . Probably the last of the original Island Indians . Nellie was in the kitchen , had just come to work , when she heard Tim arguing with Julia in the living room . Swears she recognized his voice , that Tim yelled , ' It's my money and I want it ' ! ! And then rushed out of the house . Then she heard Julia phone me . Nellie went on with her house work -- until I found Julia dead . And before you say it , Nellie ain't near strong enough to have strangled Julia . There's no doubt this Tim sneaked back and killed Mrs. Buck . Another fact : Tim's disappeared -- on the run . But there's no way off the Point except through my road block . Guess you want to see the body -- have her up the street in Doc Abel's office '' . `` Let's see it '' . We walked up Main Street to this big white house , then around to the back . Being the Harbor's sole doctor , Abel was also its Medical Examiner . The corpse was on a table , covered by a sheet . Doc Abel was busy up front with some of his live patients . Pulling back the sheet , I examined the bruises around Julia Buck's once slender throat . Powerful hands had killed her . `` Find any prints '' ? ? Chief Moore shook his big head , seemed lost in thought as he stared at the nude body . Then he said , `` Never noticed it before I mean , when she was dressed but for a woman her age , Julia had a real fine figure '' . I dropped the sheet , glanced at my watch . It was almost one and I hadn't had lunch . Still , I wanted to get this over with , had a lot of paper work waiting in my own office . I told him , `` I want to go see the Buck house '' . `` Sure '' . Walking back down Main Street , I said , `` I saw the Harbor's one squad car at the road block , we'll ride out in my car '' . `` Naw , we'll use mine '' , Moore said , opening the door of a sleek white Jaguar roadster . As I slid in beside him he said , `` Some heap , hey ? ? Got a heck of a buy on this , dirt cheap '' . `` Yeah , it's a real load '' , I told him , looking up the street at my battered Ford . Five racing minutes later we pulled into the driveway of this typical two-story house , and when the Jaguar stopped I managed to swallow . There was a garage and a modern barn in the rear , all of it standing between two large flat fields planted in early potatoes . Everything shouted gentleman farming , the kind of grandfather-father-to-son folding money the Point is known for . The fins of a Caddy were sticking out of the garage , while the inside of the house was a comfortable mixture of old and expensive contemporary furniture . Nellie Harris wasn't old , she was ancient -- a tiny shriveled woman with a face like a tan prune . She was also stone deaf in her right ear . She calmly repeated what Moore had told me . When I asked , `` Why didn't you go into the living room to see how Mrs. Buck was '' ? ? The old gal stared at me with her hard eyes , said , `` She didn't call . I do the living room last . I went up stairs and did the bath and her bedroom -- way I always do in the morning '' . `` Have you any idea what this Tim and Mrs. Buck were arguing about '' ? ? `` Probably wages . Miss Julia was a hard woman with a dollar . Years ago when I asked her to put me in Social Security , so's I wouldn't have to be working now , Miss Julia threatened to fire me -- all because it would mean a few more dollars a year to her '' . `` Did you hear Tim return '' ? ? `` No sir . Nobody came until Chief Moore '' . I drummed on the kitchen table with my pencil . `` Mrs. Buck have any men friends '' ? ? `` Her '' ? ? The wrinkled mouth laughed , revealing astonishingly strong , white , teeth . `` I never see none . But then I wasn't her social secretary '' . `` Was she on friendly terms with other members of her family '' ? ? `` Didn't have no family -- around here . They had a son -- killed in the war '' . I walked into the living room . There didn't seem to be any signs of a struggle . I told Moore , `` Where does Tim's wife live '' ? ? `` I'll take you there . Look Jed , this is an open and shut case and I have to relieve my men at the road block soon . Okay , come on '' . We did 80 miles an hour across a hard dirt road to a cluster of shacks . In late summer migratory workers lived five and six to a room in these . Now they were empty , except for a cottage across the road . Mrs. Tim Williams was about 21 , with skin the color of bitter chocolate , and if you discounted the plain dress and worn slippers , she was startlingly pretty . The inside of their place was full of new furniture , five bucks down and a buck a week stuff , but all of it clean and full of the warmth of a home . Mrs. Williams was both sullen and frightened . She said she didn't know a thing -- Tim had left the house at six in the morning , as usual . She hadn't seen him since . `` Did Mrs. Buck owe him any wages '' ? ? I asked . `` Well , for this week , but they wasn't due 'till Saturday . Listen , Mr. Inspector , no matter what anybody say , my Tim didn't kill that woman ! ! Tim is a good man , hard working . He strong as a bull but gentle as a baby . Even if he angry , Tim wouldn't hurt a woman . He never in his life took a hand to a woman or '' `` We'll get him soon , see what he says '' , Chief Moore cut in . `` Does your husband have a car '' ? ? I asked . `` Got us an old station wagon . Need it for the job '' . I asked a silly question : `` You've no idea where your husband could be , now '' ? ? She shook her head . I knew she was lying . I stood there , staring at her for a moment -- thinking mostly of her beauty and her poverty . Moore said , `` Come on , Jed , I have to get to my men '' . On my way out I told her , `` If you should eh just happen to see your husband , get him to give himself up . He'll get a fair trial . Hiding out like this won't get him anything , except more trouble , or a bullet '' . `` Yes . I'll tell him -- if I see him '' . We made it back to the Harbor in less than four minutes . I tried not to act scared . That Jaguar could really barrel along . I told Moore I was going to eat , get some forms filled out by Doc Abel . Chief Moore said , `` If I don't see you when I return , see you for certain at my road block , Inspector '' . I had a bowl of decent chowder , phoned the Doc and he said he'd leave the death statements with his girl -- in a half hour . Lighting my pipe , I took a walk . The Harbor is a big yachting basin in the summer . Even now , there were several slick cruisers tied to the dock , an ocean-going yawl anchored inside the breakwater . There was a 34 foot Wheeler with Chief Bob's in big gold letters on its stern also tied up at the dock . It wasn't a new boat , about five years old , but fitted with fishing outriggers and chairs . I asked an old guy running a fishing station if the boat was Moore's . He said , `` You bet . Bob Moore is plumb crazy about blue fishing '' . I dropped into the doctor's office , picked up my forms . As I was walking back to the Police Station , which was in the same building with the City Hall and Post Office , I saw Mrs. Tim Williams sneaking into the back of my car . If she moved gracefully , she was clumsy at it . I got into the front seat . She was ' hiding ' on the floor of the back seat , the soft curves of her back and hips -- rousing lines . I drove out of the Harbor , turned off into a dirt road among the scrub pine trees and stopped . I waited a few minutes and she sat up . For another moment we didn't talk , then she began to weep . She mumbled , `` I just know that Chief Moore is out to kill my Tim '' ! ! `` Maybe . I never saw him so anxious before '' , I said , lighting my pipe and offering her a cigarette . `` Of course , it could be because this is his first murder case . You know where Tim is , don't you , Mrs. Williams '' ? ? She puffed on the cigarette slowly , sitting slumped against the back seat ; ; didn't answer . But the police have dropped the case . I want you to go to Pearson City and find out why -- first-hand stuff for your modern crime series . Take the same train Diana Beauclerk took and get there at the same time . Go to the same hotel and occupy the same suite -- 1105 '' . `` Will the hotel rent it so soon after the crime '' ? ? `` Why not ? ? The police have finished with it . Besides , the number of the suite hasn't been published in any newspaper . To the hotel people , you'll just be an innocent tourist who happens to ask for that particular suite '' . `` Still , they may not want to rent it '' . `` That's your headache . Once inside , keep your eyes open '' ! ! `` For what '' ! ! Alec was growing more and more skeptical . `` The police will have gone over every square inch of the place with a fine-tooth comb . The hotel people will have scoured and vacuumed it . Ten to one , it's even been redecorated '' ! ! `` There's always a chance they may have overlooked something '' , returned the chief . `` I'm betting on that chance . Interview the bellboy and chambermaid who waited on Beauclerk . Study the topography of the suite . Soak up local color . Reenact everything Beauclerk did . Try to imagine you're going to be murdered yourself -- between eleven p.m. and one a.m. the night you arrive '' . Alec smirked . `` Cheerful way to spend an evening '' ! ! A sudden thought wiped the smirk from his face . `` Suppose the murderer should return to the scene of the crime '' ! ! The chief's eyes gleamed . He spoke softly . `` That is exactly what I'm hoping for . After all , the murderer is still at large . And the key to the suite is still missing '' . On the train Alec refreshed his memory of the Beauclerk case by reading teletype flimsies -- spot-news stories about the crime sent out by the Pearson City Star , a member of the Syndicate Press . Diana Beauclerk was a second-rate actress living in New York . Two weeks ago she had gone west to Pearson City . Daniel Forbes , her divorced husband , lived there . So did the firm of lawyers who had got her the divorce , Kimball and Stacy . She reached Pearson City at nine p.m. and went straight to the Hotel Westmore . She telephoned the junior partner of her law firm , Martin Stacy , and asked him to call at her hotel that evening . At the time of her divorce Forbes had promised to pay her a lump sum in lieu of further alimony if she remarried . According to Stacy , she told him she was planning to remarry and she wanted him to ask Forbes for the lump sum . Stacy replied that it would bankrupt Forbes , who had just sunk all his money in a real estate venture . Stacy said he left her suite at nine forty-five p.m. . She was in good health and spirits , but still determined to get the money from Forbes . No one saw Stacy leave . No other visitor inquired for her that evening . Next morning she was found dead in her suite with a bullet from a Colt revolver in her brain . According to the medical examiner , she was shot between eleven p.m. and one a.m. . Her door was locked and the key was missing . So was the gun . When Alec finished reading he was sure that either Forbes or Stacy had killed Diana Beauclerk . Forbes had motive and Stacy had opportunity . Find a motive for Stacy or an opportunity for Forbes and the case would be solved . The Hotel Westmore proved to be one of the older hotels in Pearson City , and definitely second-rate . Alec's first impression of the lobby was gloomy , Victorian dignity -- black walnut and red plush , a black and white tiled floor , and Persian rugs . He studied the night clerk as a man measures an adversary . `` I'd like the room I had the last time '' . `` Certainly , sir '' . The clerk was young and limp , with a tired smile . `` Do you recall the number '' ? ? `` It was 1105 '' . The clerk's smile congealed . `` That suite is taken '' . Alec's glance went to a chart of guest names and room numbers hanging on the wall behind the clerk . Opposite the number 1105 stood one word : Unoccupied . The clerk's glance followed Alec's . `` We have better rooms vacant now '' , he babbled . `` Larger and more comfortable . At the same rate '' . Alec's face was dark , blunt , and sulky . He always looked impertinent and he could look dangerous . He was looking dangerous now . He raised his voice . `` Anything wrong with the plumbing in 1105 '' ? ? There was a sudden stillness in the lobby . Two women , who had been chattering like parrots , were struck dumb . A man , lighting a match for his cigar , paused until the flame burned his fingers . Even the bellboys on their bench were listening . The clerk's eyes flickered . `` Of course not '' ! ! `` Anybody with a contagious disease been in there '' ? ? `` No '' ! ! The clerk was almost hysterical . `` It's just that -- well , 1105 is being redecorated '' . `` I don't believe it '' . Alec leaned on the desk , holding the clerk's eyes with his . `` Suppose you tell me the real reason '' , he drawled . `` There might be a story in it '' . `` St-story '' ? ? `` I'm with the Syndicated Press , Feature Service . Either I get the story -- or I get the suite '' . It was blackmail and the clerk knew it . `` There is no story '' , he piped tremulously . `` Front ! ! Show this gentleman to 1105 '' ! ! The stillness persisted as Alec followed a bellboy across the lobby to the elevator . He could feel eyes on his back . He wished it had not been necessary to announce the number of his suite quite so publicly . The corridor on the eleventh floor was dimly lighted by electric globes at intervals of thirty feet . A thick , crimson carpet muffled every footfall . At the end of the corridor Alec noticed a door marked : Fire Stairs . It was a neat setup for murder . The bellboy unlocked a white door numbered 1105 . The room was dark but a neon sign flashed and faded beyond the window . A few snowflakes sifted down through that theatrical red glow , languid as falling feathers . Hastily the boy switched on a ceiling light . The room looked normal and even commonplace . There was no hint of a violent struggle now . Deal furniture with a mahogany finish was neatly arranged as if it stood in the window of a department store . The blue rug was suspiciously bright and new . It had never been stained with blood . Table covers and towels were clean , ashtrays empty and supplied with fresh matches . The mirror over the bureau was a blank eye , round and innocent . Alec played the part of an innocent tourist . `` Is there anything wrong with this room '' ? ? `` N-no '' . The boy dropped his eyes . `` Afraid you'll lose your job if you don't keep your mouth shut '' ? ? The boy raised his eyes . `` Listen , mister . If you want my advice , pack up and take the next train back to New York '' . `` Were you on duty here two weeks ago '' ? ? The boy hesitated . Then , `` I'm not talking . But I wouldn't spend a night in here for a million bucks '' ! ! He was in a hurry to get out of the room . Alec gave him a tip and let him go . Alone , Alec examined the doors . There were three -- one leading to a bathroom , one to the hall , and one to the room next door which was immovable -- locked or bolted on the other side . Alec locked the hall door and put the key with his watch on the bedside table . It was just quarter of nine . As he ranged his belongings on the bureau he noticed a film of white dust on the dark surface of the wood beyond the linen cover . Not gray like the dust that collects in an unused room , but white . Women didn't use white face powder nowadays , he recalled . They used pink , tan , or cream powder . Alec glanced into the bathroom . Blood in the bathtub where the murderer appears to have washed his hands . It seemed clean now , but Alec decided against a bath . He crawled into bed and switched off the light . In the darkness he could see the rosy reflection of the neon sign on the wall opposite the window . It winked as steadily as a metronome -- on , off -- on , off . In less than five minutes Alec was asleep . He never knew just what woke him . Yet suddenly he was wide-awake . There was no sound and apparently no movement in the room except the noiseless pulsation of the red light on the wall . He lay still , listening to the silence , watching the light . Somewhere in the city a big clock sounded twelve solemn notes -- midnight . According to the medical examiner she was shot between eleven p.m. and one a.m. . Alec heard a faint sound . His heart seemed to swell and knock against the wall of his chest . For the sound was inside the room . He let his eyelids droop and breathed heavily , feigning sleep . The sound was coming nearer . A monstrous shadow fell across the illuminated wall , distorted and indefinable . When the neon sign faded out , the shadow disappeared . When the neon sign flashed on , the shadow was still there . It stretched to an impossible height , climbing the wall to the ceiling . That meant that something between the light and its reflection on the wall was moving closer to the source of the light -- in this case , the window . Cautiously Alec tensed his muscles , ready to jump . The bedsprings betrayed him with a creak . The shadow vanished . Someone had moved beyond the range of the light from the window . Abandoning caution , Alec leaped out of bed and groped for the light switch . Before he could snap it on , a stinging blow caught him in the ribs . He lashed out blindly with his right . There was a thick , squashy crack of fist on flesh . Something hard grazed his knuckles . He put everything he had into the next and aimed down where the stomach ought to be . Rough cloth rasped his fist . There was a grunt , curiously inarticulate , like that of an animal in pain . Something heavy shook the floor as it dropped . Alec waited a moment , on guard . Nothing happened . Again he groped for the light switch . The blue rug had been rolled up and stacked in one corner of the room . On the bare floorboards a man lay face down . He had a short , heavy , powerful body . Alec turned him over and discovered a round , lumpy face with narrow , slanting eyes -- a primitive Tartar face from Russia or the Balkans . The man's shoes were too pointed , his overcoat too broad at the shoulders and too narrow at the waist . There was a slight bulge under the left armpit -- a shoulder holster . Alec promptly removed the gun . He was familiar with this type . He had seen it in the lineup at Police Headquarters in New York , in Broadway night clubs and Seventh Avenue pool rooms , in the criminal courts . But he was surprised to meet it here . Diana Beauclerk had no connection with the underworld . A professional gunman would not have killed her with a weapon of such small caliber as a . Nor would he choose a respectable hotel as the scene for a killing when it would be so much safer to take his victim for a one-way ride on a lonely country road . The man's eyelids fluttered . He opened his eyes . `` What are you doing here '' ? ? Demanded Alec . The man made no reply . His eyes were dazed . His lips were bruised and swollen where Alec had hit him . `` Did you kill Diana Beauclerk '' ? ? Alec expected an indignant denial , but there was no response at all . `` Oh , come on , snap out of it ! ! Or I'll turn you over to the police '' ! ! The silence was getting on Alec's nerves . The man opened his mouth , but no words came . Only that curious , animal grunting Alec had heard during their fight . `` Don't you speak English '' ? ? The man opened his mouth wider . A forefinger pointed toward his gullet . Alec leaned forward to look . There were hideous scars inside the throat and the palate was mutilated . In good time I shall get to the distressing actuality , to Red McIver and Handley Walker , to murder and sudden death . But you realize , I am sure , how much old deeds incite to new ones , and you must forgive me if I tell you first of the old ones . It was in 1814 that Abraham Wharf and his sister sat by a meager fire in their house on Dogtown Common , a desolate place even then . He was sharpening his razor . `` Sister '' , said he `` do you think people who commit suicide go to heaven '' ? ? And she answered , `` I don't know , but I hope you'll never do such a thing '' . Without a tremor , `` God forbid '' ! ! He said , and went out and cut his throat in the cave near Granny Day's swamp . What has this to do with the present ? ? Much , I assure you . You must know what gets into people , even such as Red and Handley , before you can tell what comes out of them . They had learned , both of them , about Abraham Wharf . That's why I beg you not to forget him . His ghost is not laid . Red and Handley , God help them , knew the old Dogtown lore ; ; and I knew they knew it , for I'd told them a lot of it . And isn't it true that you get a deeper perception about a man and his motives when you know what it is he knows ? ? Yes , gentlemen , I am getting to the point , to my point . You know the facts ; ; they are set forth in your own newspapers . You want from me the story , but a story is about ' why ' and then , perhaps , about how . The ' when ' you know ; ; yesterday morning . So what I am trying to tell you is the ' why ' -- that is my point -- and that concerns the spirit of the matter . There is an inwardness and a luster to old furniture ( look at that mahogany highboy behind you ) which has a provocative emanation , if I may say so . Places , too , have their haunting qualities . Even people . And my point in this sad story is the spirit of the matter . When you hold the spirit of a thing , then somehow you know the truth -- you know a fake antique from the real thing . And the truth is what you've come for , is it not ? ? Now , Dogtown is one of those places that creeps into the marrow as worms get into old wood , under the veneer . In fact , all the folk who lived on the back of Cape Ann , they are not just like others . There's a different hall-mark on them . There were no witch burnings here because everyone had a witch in the family . Just think of old Granther Stannard who pulled the teeth of Dark Younger ( her real name was Dorcas ) , and because he bungled the job and left two protruding tusks she put such a hex on him that he thought his legs were made of glass . After that he was never known to run or even walk fast . Today Dogtown is the only deserted village in all New England that I know of . There it sits , a small highland , with towns like Gloucester near by ; ; but now it's the most lost and tortured place in the world . Those who lived in that desolation of rocky deformity took on some of the moraine's stony character . Scientists say it is the last spewings of a great glacier , but one rather feels that only a malevolent giant could have piled up those crouching monsters of granite which still seem to preserve a sort of suspended , ominous life in them . We'll walk up there later . It's perhaps a mile from here where we sit . And not one single dwelling left there , though once , in the early eighteenth century , there were close to a hundred houses . ( I myself have identified about sixty sites , from the old maps and registers . A fascinating pursuit , I assure you . ) Even I can remember nothing but ruined cellars and tumbled pillars , and nobody has lived there in the memory of any living man . It is now a sweep of boulders and ledges , with oak , walnut and sumac creeping across the common , and everywhere the ruins and the long , long shadows . That's your setting , and a sinister one . Please get that in your reports . It accounts for so many things . Both Red McIver and Handley Walker lived nearby , almost as near as I do . Red lived at Lanesville , and from his house he could be up on the Common in a half hour's brisk walk ; ; Handley lived further on , at Pigeon Cove . I'd often find one or other of them up around Dogtown sketching . They were both painters , ( They were ? ? They are ? ? What should one say ? ? ) Well , anyhow , Dogtown Common is so much off the beaten track nowadays that only Sunday picnickers still stray up there , from time to time . Sea-road , railroad , lack of water , killed Dogtown . Dead , dead as a brass door nail , and I sometimes feel like the Sexton , for I'm about the last to be even interested . I knew Red and Handley well . As I said , they were both painters . They'd come , separately , to Gloucester some twenty years ago -- there's always been an artists' colony somewhere on Cape Ann -- and each married here . They married cousins , Anta and Freya Norberg . There are a lot of Scandinavians in this neck of the woods , and many still make painted furniture and take steam-baths . Pretty girls among them , with blonde hair and pert faces . Handley married Freya and Red , of the red beard , married Anta . And it was because of an old Norberg inheritance that I got to understand them all so well . The quarrel ended in a ridiculous draw , but I must tell you about it . Oh , yes , I'm quite sure it's important , because of the Beech Pasture . What's that ? ? Why , that's what gave me the feeling , gave me as-it-were the spirit , the demoniac , evil spirit of this whole affair . You see , besides being custodian of antiquities , I am also registrar . No , I don't hold with those who live entirely among dead things . I know as well as the next man that a ship is called from the rigging she carries , where the live wind blows , and not from the hull . But you've got to know both . What's below the water-line interests me also . As I was saying , I've known all about the old records , including the old Norberg deed . Some ten years ago that page was torn out , I don't know by whom . About five years ago , Handley came to ask me if he could see the tattered register . He was courteous and casual about it , as though it were of no consequence . He's always like that , in spite of being a big man . ( When you see him , you'll notice his habit of fingering , I might almost say , stroking a large mole with black hairs on it , by his right temple . ) A sensual man , but very courteous , some would say slick . Like his glossy black hair . Too many outside manners , to my taste . He is the sort who , with an appraising eye , would cross the street to help a strange woman on to a bus and then pinch her . A real gentleman , I feel , would do neither . He's always worn a broad-brimmed hat , and I've noticed , in my small study at the Society , that he rather smells of cosmetics . The next week , cousin Red wandered in as casually , but curt and untidy . Red was small and fine-boned , like ivory-inlay . He too asked to see the same page . When I told him someone had torn it out , he shouted . `` By God , it's that damn Handley , the sneak '' ! ! And later in the same week they both came together to examine the register . Fortunately we were alone in the building -- so few people nowadays are interested even in their own past or in the lovely craft of other days -- for they began to abuse each other in the foulest language . Red thrusting out his tawny beard , Handley glowering under his suddenly rumpled black hair . They actually bristled . Le rouge et le noir . Violent men both . Red always was morose , yet that day the dapper Handley was the louder of the two . But for my presence , they would have been at each others' throats . During the quarrel I learned what the trouble was , from the accusations each hurled at the other . The Beech Pasture had suddenly become valuable . There's a fine granite quarry there , and granite's coming back for public buildings . Both men knew it was in the Norberg family holdings , but to which of the cousins did it belong , Anta or Freya ? ? Fortunately , I knew almost exactly what the will had said . It began with a preamble , of course . This explained that the judge of probate of Essex County , 1785 or 1786 , appointed three free-holders of Gloucester to divide and establish the Norberg estate . After the usual Honorable Sirs , it went on to say that there had been set off to the widow one full third part of the real estate of the deceased Salu Norberg , one lower room , on the Western side , privileges to the well and bake-oven and to one third of the cellar ( I can show you the cellar when we go up ) , also one Cow Right , and lastly they set off to the widow her own land that she brought with her as dower , namely the Beech Pasture . And I remember that the whole of the privileges , not counting the Beech Pasture , was valued at twenty pounds . I wish you could have seen the crests fall on these two sparring coxcombs when I told them that obviously the pasture belonged to their wives jointly . That battle scene , ridiculous as it was , remained in my mind . A disturbing picture of bad blood , to be further heightened with illicit if buccolic colors , for on a subsequent day I saw Handley escorting Anta , Red's wife , up on Dogtown Common . I felt it would be inopportune to disclose my presence . Not that I intentionally go unperceived , but the boulders up there are very high and I am a small woman . One other cause of jealousy between them I must tell you . Paint ! ! Gloomy and unkempt as Red McIver was , he was much the better painter . I suppose Handley knew it . If Red had a show at Gloucester , Handley would hurry to hang his pictures in Rockport . You may say this has little pertinence , but , gentlemen , remember that all this prepared my mind , alerted my intelligence . By such touches the pattern takes shape . You would call these the motives of crime . I would call them the patterns of life , perhaps even the designs of destiny . Yet with all this knowledge I had nothing of substance to unravel our case , as you would call it , till yesterday . One month ago , on the 20th of October , was the opening of the gunning season in Massachusetts . Not much to shoot , but there are a few pheasant . Rabbits , too , if you care for them , which most of the folk around here haven't the sense to appreciate . Any more than they have the sense to eat mussels . That was the day Red was said to have gone away . Oh yes , he'd talked about doing so . In fact , he often disappeared , from time to time , -- off to paint the sea , aboard a dragger out from Gloucester . Anta , his wife , never seemed to mind . I suppose these absences gave her more clearance for her embraces with Cousin Handley . Anyhow , I wasn't surprised , early that morning , to see Handley himself crossing from Dogtown Common Road to the Back Road . No , he didn't have his gun , which he should have . It would have been a good excuse for his being there at all . I myself had been up there by seven o'clock , after mushrooms , since there'd been a week of rain which had stopped early that morning and the day was as clear as Sandwich glass . That's what the man had said . Haney peered doubtfully at his drinking companion through bleary , tear-filled eyes . He had no ready answer , as much from surprise as from the fit of coughing . Was the man drunk or crazy or both ? ? But his new-found buddy had matched him drink for drink until he lost count , and the man's eyes were still clear . The guy is off his rocker , Haney thought to himself , and looked away from those eyes . Eyes that were clear , but also bright with a strange intensity , a sort of cold fire burning behind them . Why hadn't he noticed it before ? ? No , the man was not drunk He wondered how he got tied up with this stranger . But , of course , he remembered now . It was blurred , after two hours of steady drinking , but the occasion of it came back to him . The stranger , his head seemingly sunk in thought , started to cross the street against the light just as a huge moving van roared through the intersection . Brakes howled and a horn blared furiously , but the man would have been hit if Phil hadn't called out to him a second before . His shout had been involuntary , something anybody might have done without thinking , on the spur of the moment . As a matter of fact , he wouldn't have cared at all if the guy had been hit . Actually , he regretted having opened his mouth when the truck came to a stop and the angry driver jumped down from the cab and walked back toward them . By then , the stranger was thanking Haney profusely and had one arm around his shoulders as if he were an old friend . So the driver started to curse at both of them as if they had been in a plot together to ruin his safe-driving record . Then the man he saved turned and looked squarely into the truck driver's face , without saying a word . Very suddenly , the driver stopped swearing at them , turned on his heel and went back to his truck . Haney hadn't given it much thought at the time . Now he recalled it very clearly , and wondered what the truck driver had seen in those eyes to make him back off . It must have been the sort of look that can call a bluff without saying a word . When the light went their way , they went on across the street . And when the stranger found out that Phil was on the way to one of his favorite bars , he insisted on offering to buy drinks for both of them . Phil usually went alone and kept to himself , sitting in a corner and passing the time by nursing his favorite grudges . But he decided he wouldn't mind company in return for free drinks , even though he made good money at his job . Phil was like that . Now he wondered if it was worth it , having a screwball for company . He really didn't take the offer seriously , but he began to feel uneasy . When he finally got the coughing under control , he realized that Pete ( all he gave was his first name ) was still waiting for an answer -- he didn't even seem to wink as he continued to stare . Haney managed a weak laugh . `` Guess I can't think of anyone , Pete . Thanks anyhow '' . A faint crease appeared between the man's eyebrows . `` I think you aren't taking me seriously , Phil . I meant it . And everybody has some kind of grudge . I might have got hit by that truck if it wasn't for you . I believe in returning favors . I'll do anything for somebody I like . It won't cost you a cent , Phil . Go ahead and try me '' ! ! Phil rubbed his forehead wearily . He was beginning to feel woolly . Maybe it would be better to humor the guy and then make an exit . He really didn't expect anything to come of it , and there were a few people `` All right '' , he conceded finally , `` if you must know , I don't get along with the landlord . He keeps riding me because I like to listen to the radio and sing while I'm taking a bath . He says the neighbors complain , but I don't believe it . Why don't they tell me themselves if it bothers them '' ? ? The man closed his eyes and nodded . When he looked up again , he seemed almost contented . `` Fine . Give me your address . It will take a little time . I want to study your landlord's habits and movements first . You see , I always make it look like an accident . Maybe suicide , if it looks reasonable . In that way there's no trouble for the customer '' . Haney's eyebrows flew up . `` Customer '' ? ? Pete smiled modestly . `` It's my line of work '' , he said Five minutes later , before Haney could make his break , the stranger stood up and nodded farewell . Haney watched the small but wiry man slip out the door quickly and silently , and felt relieved to see that nobody else seemed to notice his departure . Phil decided to stay a little longer , and as time passed it seemed as if the strange little man had never been there , but for the other glass on the table . Some time before midnight he returned to his apartment and hit the sack , putting the whole incident out of mind before he fell asleep . The next day , Sunday , the hangover reminded Haney where he had been the night before . The hangover in turn reminded him of his conversation with the weirdy , and he groaned . He went for more aspirin later in the day , and passed the surly landlord on the way -- he was still alive and scowling as usual , as if tenants were a burden in his life . Phil shrugged and ignored him . He went back to work Monday . By Wednesday the landlord was still alive . Of course On Thursday , Haney mailed the monthly check for separate maintenance to his wife Lolly , and wished the stranger could do something about her Coming home from work , he was startled to see a police car parked in front of the apartment building . Inside the lobby , people were standing around , talking excitedly . His spine crawled with a foreboding premonition as he asked one of his fellow tenants what had happened . The landlord had died . Late that afternoon , it seemed , he had fallen off the roof while on some obscure errand or inspection . He had apparently been alone . Nobody witnessed the fall -- just the sickening impact when his body smashed on the pavement just outside the basement delivery entrance . Haney hoped that nobody noticed his sudden pallor , as he felt the blood drain from his cheeks . He muttered something about how terrible it was , and walked with deliberate slowness to the elevator . Once inside his apartment , he poured a drink with trembling hands and flopped limply in a chair . After a while he began to feel better about it , especially when no one bothered to ask any questions . But after all , why should they ? ? Still later , he finally convinced himself that it was an accident -- just a coincidence . The stranger really had nothing to do with it , of course Haney went to bed , happy that at least he was rid of that lousy landlord . After all , the man had no family , so no one suffered , and everybody was better off for it . Really , he said to himself , nobody kills a man just as a favor ! ! So you thought I didn't mean what I said . The stranger's eyes were large and sad , as if Phil Haney had hurt his feelings . It was like a recurrent , annoying dream , but now the dream was beginning to take on overtones of a nightmare . However , Haney knew it was not a dream . He might be very tight , but he knew where he was . It was the same bar , and it was two weeks later -- Saturday night , when he had an excuse to drink heavier than usual . He had been sitting in the usual corner at the little table , as far as possible from any talkative , friendly lushes . He was enjoying the weekly ritual of washing down his pet grievance with bourbon slightly moistened with water . This favorite grievance was not the landlord . He had already quite forgotten about him . In fact , he had only mentioned him on the spur of the moment . His real grievance was Lolly . Toward the end of his fourth hairy highball , while he was moodily making wet rings on the table-top with the bottom of the glass , he became aware that he was not alone . He looked up with bloodshot eyes and beheld the stranger sitting across the table , smiling a secret smile at him , as if they were fellow conspirators . He hadn't even noticed -- what was his name ? ? Pete ? ? -- he hadn't seen him sit down . The man was uncanny , like a shadow , and made as much noise as a shadow . Haney felt like shrinking out of sight , but he was already trapped in the corner with the wiry , dark little man . He began to wish that he hadn't shouted that other evening when the truck bore down through the crossing . Was he going to be saddled from now on with a creep for a bar-buddy ? ? He'd have to start going to some of the other places again . In a low voice , almost whispering , the man had asked Phil if he was happy with the way the landlord had been taken off his back . He made the mistake of answering in an offhand way , and instantly realized that his skepticism must have showed in his face or voice . Pete frowned slightly , then became sad and moody . Haney didn't want to encourage his company , but felt he ought to buy him a drink anyhow , to prevent possible trouble . But there was no trouble . The guy sulked over his drink , obviously upset by Haney's lack of appreciation . To break the uncomfortable silence , Haney began to talk . In time , and two drinks later , he was complaining bitterly about his wife , He was on the subject for ten minutes or so when he noticed the renewed interest in his listener -- it showed in the alert face and the suddenly bright eyes . When he paused to moisten his throat , the stranger broke in . `` But why pay her bills ? ? If she runs around with other men , and if you hate her as you say , why not just divorce her '' ? ? Haney scowled . `` That bitch would love a divorce '' , he growled . `` Then she'd get half of everything I have . Community property deal -- you know . I'd have to sell out my business to pay her off with her share . She can drop dead '' ! ! Pete nodded understandingly . `` Oh yes . Now I see . You must understand , I haven't been in this state too long . I came out here to retire . That's why I -- why I do a free job now and then . You should have told me about her before '' . Haney felt a twinge of annoyance when he heard the now familiar line again . Then a wild thought ran circles through his clouded brain . Suppose -- just suppose this guy was really what he said he was ! ! A retired professional killer If he was just a nut , no harm was done . But if he was the real thing , he could do something about Lolly . He felt very cunning , very proud of himself as he played on the other man's soft spot . `` No offense intended '' , he said gently . `` But it's just that -- well , you know . The cops didn't suspect a thing , and I thought it was a coincidence . After all , I didn't know you , Pete . It could have been an accident '' . He shrugged casually . `` But if you say you managed it '' The stranger was hooked . His eyes burned feverishly . `` Yes , yes '' , he muttered impatiently . `` Of course it looked like an accident . I always work it that way -- and always at a time when the customer has an alibi . Let me prove it , Phil . I think I can manage one more favor for you '' . He waited eagerly . Haney swished the liquor in the bottom of his glass . About halfway back Pops groped against a wall and stopped , pulled away two loosely nailed wide boards at one end , and went through . `` C'mon '' , he whispered ; ; `` floor level's about three feet down , so don't fall '' . I went through and down , into pitch darkness . He said , `` Jist stay still . I'll pull the boards back and then get us a light . Jist stay where you are '' . I jist stayed where I was while he fumbled around and then walked away . A moment later he struck a match and lighted a candle , and I could see . It was a big room , empty except for a few things of Pops's at the far end -- a wooden crate on which stood the candle , a spread out blanket , and an unrolled bindle . I looked back over my shoulder while I went to join him ; ; he'd hung another half of a blanket over the boarded window so no light would show through . I took the pint bottle from my pocket and handed it over as I sat down beside him on the spread blanket . `` You first '' , I said . He drank and handed it back . `` Nice place '' , I told him . `` Listen , I got a buddy I travel with , real nice guy named Larry . I know where he is , right near here . Could he join the party and sleep here tonight too ? ? We'll both be blowing town tomorrow so we won't be moving in on you '' . He hesitated a second , looking at the bottle , before he said `` Sure-sure '' , and I reassured him . `` He'll bring a bottle too , and I'll get another one or maybe two while I'm out . You can work on this one while I'm gone , kill it if you want '' . I took a short swallow from it myself and handed it to him . His `` sure-sure '' was enthusiastic this time . He put the bottle down . `` Git over by the window while there's light , an' I'll put th' candle out . When yuh come back I'll put it out agin till you're both inside '' . Charlie was waiting , leaning against a building front . `` Perfect set-up '' , I told him . `` But we got to go back to Fifth and get another bottle or two . On the way I'll give you the scoop '' . On the way I gave him the scoop . I bought another pint of sherry and when we got back Pops let us in in the dark , put back the blanket and then lighted the candle again . I introduced my friend Larry to Pops and we made ourselves comfortable . There was still a little , not much , left in the first bottle and we passed it around once and killed it , and Charlie opened his . I was reminded , amusedly , by a poem of Kenneth Patchen's called The Murder of Two Men by a Young Kid Wearing Lemon Colored Gloves , which Patchen himself read on a record against jazz background . The poem consisted of only two words , the word `` Wait '' , repeated over and over at irregular intervals and with different inflections , and then the word `` Now '' ! ! And a blaring final chord from the jazz group . This was the same , except that it was the murder of one man by two men and neither of us was wearing gloves . But we could wait all right ; ; there was no hurry . I said , `` Wait wait '' to Charlie and he grinned , digging the reference . We'd heard the record together once . The second bottle passed a few times . Pops was taking long ones , but not showing the effect yet . He seemed as drunk as when I'd first talked to him , but no drunker . He had a capacity ; ; if we'd really been trying to get him dead drunk we'd have had to go out for more wine . About halfway through the second bottle , Charlie looked at me across Pops , who was sitting between us and asked `` Now '' ? ? I said , `` Wait '' , and handed the bottle to Pops for his final drink . When he handed it back and I had hold of it safely , Pops was looking toward me and I said `` Now '' , to Charlie and he swung the short length of lead pipe he'd meanwhile taken from his pocket , once . It was a lead pipe cinch . There was a sound like the one you produce by flicking a watermelon with your finger , only louder , and Pops fell forward from the waist and then over sidewise . Out cold , if not dead ; ; and he'd never known what hit him -- he'd never known that anything had hit him . I reached my hand toward him to put it inside his shirt to feel for a heartbeat , but Charlie said `` Wait '' ! ! -- and said it sharply , not as in the Patchen bit , but as an order -- so I stopped my hand and looked at him . He was holding the piece of lead pipe out to me . `` We don't want to know whether he's dead , yet . I gauged that blow to be borderline . To kayo him and maybe or maybe not kill . You hit again about twice that hard before we know whether he's dead or not . That way we'll never know which of us really killed him and which was just the accomplice . Dig '' ? ? I dug him , I saw his point ; ; it made sense . I took the piece of pipe from Charlie's hand and used it , harder than he had . The thunk was louder , anyway , and I thought I heard bone crack . Charlie said , `` Good boy . That did it , if mine didn't . And we'll never know which . All right , now I'll give you a hand '' . We straightened Pops up and I made sure there was no trace of a heartbeat . I nodded to Charlie . `` Let's put him down again the way he was . It's a more natural position '' . We did that . `` How do you feel '' ? ? Charlie asked me . `` Cool '' , I told him . `` What do you feel '' ? ? `` Nothing . Well maybe I'm exaggerating . It was a kick , but not a big enough one for me to want to take the chance again , except for stakes . But let's not talk about it abstractly until we're out of here . Now , first question : the bottles . Shall we take them all with us , or leave one '' ? ? `` Take them '' , I said . `` If we left one we'd have to wipe it for fingerprints . Here's the picture we want to leave for the fuzz -- whenever the body gets found . This happened in the middle of a drinking bout with another bum . If they'd been working on a bottle or a jug he'd have taken it with him '' . `` Right . And he'd have taken the weapon with him too , so we take that . Now '' -- He looked around . `` I've been careful about fingerprints . How about you '' ? ? `` Same . There are the boards over the window , of course , but they're not painted and too rough to take prints . Same goes for the rough cement of the ledge . Besides , I doubt if the cops will even try dusting . They find dead winos every day , maybe they won't even autopsy him for the cause of death '' . `` We can't take a chance on that . We've got to assume they'll decide he was murdered and we've got to keep the picture consistent . Our hypothetical other bum who killed him would have turned out his pockets . Let's do that '' . We did that and found a dirty handkerchief , some matches and fourteen cents in change . We took the matches -- they were book matches and once they'd been touched might retain fingerprints -- and the change . We discussed the candle and decided the hypothetical other bum would have left it burning to light his way to the window and because he'd have no reason to blow it out . The candle had been stuck on a tin lid so it wouldn't set fire to the crate when it guttered out . A fire wouldn't have mattered except that it would cause Pops to be found sooner . He might not be found for days , even weeks , otherwise . We went once more over every point , then triple-checked . Being picked up for questioning by a cop on the way out seemed to be the only possible remaining danger , and we weren't picked up by a cop . In fact , nobody saw us , cop or citizen . Winsett is a quiet street with no taverns and was completely deserted at that hour . Which , if it matters , was one A.M. . Less than three hours ago we'd decided , in Maxine Wells's pad on Cosmo , to commit a trial murder . It had gone like clockwork . Almost too smoothly , I found myself thinking , and then told myself that was ridiculous . How safe is too safe ? ? Thinking like that can get you into a padded pad . An hour later we were back in my unpadded pad , killing what had been left of the second pint . We decided to leave the third one intact for tomorrow . Also our plans for me to commit Charlie's murder and for him to commit mine . But we were really going to do it . We shook hands on it . We planned ahead only one step , a rendezvous for tomorrow when we could swap notes . I'd tell him everything I'd learned about Seaton's habits and habitat , and he'd tell me the score on Radic . We made the date for two o'clock in the afternoon at Maxine Wells's pad . Charlie would get there early because he had the key . From here on in , the less Charlie and I were seen together in public , or visited one another's rooms , the better . I was dead tired and slept soundly , as far as I know dreamlessly . We met at Maxine's and decided we were set to stay as long as it took , into or even through the evening , to talk things out . Charlie had brought food and we'd decided on no drinks . I'd brought along the virgin pint from last night , but we were going to kill that only when we were through talking . I talked first , telling him everything I knew about Seaton and his house and domestic arrangements . I drew diagrams and floor plans ; ; he memorized them thoroughly and then we tore them into tiny pieces and flushed them down . He gave me equivalent and even more detailed dope on Radic , including diagrams -- one of the apartment building Radic lived in and one of the apartment itself . He'd been there several times , back when , while he and Radic had been friends , or at least not enemies . It didn't take us as long as we'd thought it might ; ; it was not quite six o'clock when we finished and Charlie said , `` Well , I guess that's it . Shall we flip a coin to see which of us goes first ? ? Or would you rather deal a hand of show-down poker or play a game of gin rummy , or what '' ? ? `` Wait a minute , Charlie '' , I said . `` One thing we haven't discussed , expense money . We'll need some at least , if only bus fare to the scene of the crime . And if you're as flat broke as I am , I think we'll have to take the added risk of knocking over a filling station or something before we split for one of us to set up an alibi while the other does his dirty work '' . He sighed . `` All right , I'll come clean . I've got a little stashed for a rainy day , and I guess this is rainy enough . A couple of hundred . If you draw the short straw I'll lend you some bread , like fifty bucks , before I take off to visit my sister in Frisco . Then , after I'm back , another fifty so you can put some mileage on yourself and have a solid alibi somewhere while I take care of your seat cover boy '' . `` Solid '' , I said . I took a deep breath , and the plunge . `` In that case , let's not draw . I'll go to bat first . You'd have to wait till Seaton's back from Mexico City and also while I set it up with Doris to have her have an alibi for D-night . So it wouldn't be for days or even a week before you could do anything . But your friend Manny can go any time '' . He grinned and clapped me on the shoulder . `` I was hoping you'd say that , Willy . But I wouldn't have suggested it . Well -- in that case , I take off tomorrow morning for Frisco . And , in case , I brought the money with me '' . Now that he knew himself to be self he was free to grok ever closer to his brothers , merge without let . Self's integrity was and is and ever had been . Mike stopped to cherish all his brother selves , the many threes-fulfilled on Mars , corporate and discorporate , the precious few on Earth -- the unknown powers of three on Earth that would be his to merge with and cherish now that at last long waiting he grokked and cherished himself . Mike remained in trance ; ; there was much to grok , loose ends to puzzle over and fit into his growing -- all that he had seen and heard and been at the Archangel Foster Tabernacle ( not just cusp when he and Digby had come face to face alone ) why Bishop Senator Boone made him warily uneasy , how Miss Dawn Ardent tasted like a water brother when she was not , the smell of goodness he had incompletely grokked in the jumping up and down and wailing -- Jubal's conversations coming and going -- Jubal's words troubled him most ; ; he studied them , compared them with what he had been taught as a nestling , struggling to bridge between languages , the one he thought with and the one he was learning to think in . The word `` church '' which turned up over and over again among Jubal's words gave him knotty difficulty ; ; there was no Martian concept to match it -- unless one took `` church '' and `` worship '' and `` God '' and `` congregation '' and many other words and equated them to the totality of the only world he had known during growing-waiting then forced the concept back into English in that phrase which had been rejected ( by each differently ) by Jubal , by Mahmoud , by Digby . `` Thou art God '' . He was closer to understanding it in English now , although it could never have the inevitability of the Martian concept it stood for . In his mind he spoke simultaneously the English sentence and the Martian word and felt closer grokking . Repeating it like a student telling himself that the jewel is in the lotus he sank into nirvana . Before midnight he speeded his heart , resumed normal breathing , ran down his check list , uncurled and sat up . He had been weary ; ; now he felt light and gay and clear-headed , ready for the many actions he saw spreading out before him . He felt a puppyish need for company as strong as his earlier necessity for quiet . He stepped out into the hall , was delighted to encounter a water brother . `` Hi '' ! ! `` Oh . Hello , Mike . My , you look chipper '' . `` I feel fine ! ! Where is everybody '' ? ? `` Asleep . Ben and Stinky went home an hour ago and people started going to bed '' . `` Oh '' . Mike felt disappointed that Mahmoud had left ; ; he wanted to explain his new grokking . `` I ought to be asleep , too , but I felt like a snack . Are you hungry '' ? ? `` Sure , I'm hungry '' ! ! `` Come on , there's some cold chicken and we'll see what else '' . They went downstairs , loaded a tray lavishly . `` Let's take it outside . It's plenty warm '' . `` A fine idea '' , Mike agreed . `` Warm enough to swim -- real Indian summer . I'll switch on the floods '' . `` Don't bother '' , Mike answered . `` I'll carry the tray '' . He could see in almost total darkness . Jubal said that his night-sight probably came from the conditions in which he had grown up , and Mike grokked this was true but grokked that there was more to it ; ; his foster parents had taught him to see . As for the night being warm , he would have been comfortable naked on Mount Everest but his water brothers had little tolerance for changes in temperature and pressure ; ; he was considerate of their weakness , once he learned of it . But he was looking forward to snow -- seeing for himself that each tiny crystal of the water of life was a unique individual , as he had read -- walking barefoot , rolling in it . In the meantime he was pleased with the warm night and the still more pleasing company of his water brother . `` Okay , take the tray . I'll switch on the underwater lights . That'll be plenty to eat by '' . `` Fine '' . Mike liked having light up through the ripples ; ; it was a goodness , beauty . They picnicked by the pool , then lay back on the grass and looked at stars . `` Mike , there's Mars . It is Mars , isn't it ? ? Or Antares '' ? ? `` It is Mars '' . `` Mike ? ? What are they doing on Mars '' ? ? He hesitated ; ; the question was too wide for the sparse English language . `` On the side toward the horizon -- the southern hemisphere -- it is spring ; ; plants are being taught to grow '' . `` ' Taught to grow ' '' ? ? He hesitated . `` Larry teaches plants to grow . I have helped him . But my people -- Martians , I mean ; ; I now grok you are my people -- teach plants another way . In the other hemisphere it is growing colder and nymphs , those who stayed alive through the summer , are being brought into nests for quickening and more growing '' . He thought . `` Of the humans we left at the equator , one has discorporated and the others are sad '' . Yes , I heard it in the news '' . Mike had not heard it ; ; he had not known it until asked . `` They should not be sad . Mr. Booker T. W. Jones Food Technician First Class is not sad ; ; the Old Ones have cherished him '' . `` You knew him '' ? ? `` Yes . He had his own face , dark and beautiful . But he was homesick '' . `` Oh , dear ! ! Mike do you ever get homesick ? ? For Mars '' ? ? `` At first I was homesick '' , he answered . `` I was lonely always '' . He rolled toward her and took her in his arms . `` But now I am not lonely . I grok I shall never be lonely again '' . `` Mike darling '' -- They kissed , and went on kissing . Presently his water brother said breathlessly . `` Oh , my ! ! That was almost worse than the first time '' . `` You are all right , my brother '' ? ? `` Yes . Yes indeed . Kiss me again '' . A long time later , by cosmic clock , she said , `` Mike ? ? Is that -- I mean , ' Do you know ' '' -- `` I know . It is for growing closer . Now we grow closer '' . `` Well I've been ready a long time -- goodness , we all have , but never mind , dear ; ; turn just a little . I'll help '' . As they merged , grokking together , Mike said softly and triumphantly : `` Thou art God '' . Her answer was not in words . Then , as their grokking made them ever closer and Mike felt himself almost ready to discorporate her voice called him back : `` Oh ! ! Oh ! ! Thou art God '' ! ! `` We grok God '' . 25 . On Mars humans were building pressure domes for the male and female party that would arrive by next ship . This went faster than scheduled as the Martians were helpful . Part of the time saved was spent on a preliminary estimate for a long-distance plan to free bound oxygen in the sands of Mars to make the planet more friendly to future human generations . The Old Ones neither helped nor hindered this plan ; ; time was not yet . Their meditations were approaching a violent cusp that would shape Martian art for many millennia . On Earth elections continued and a very advanced poet published a limited edition of verse consisting entirely of punctuation marks and spaces ; ; Time magazine reviewed it and suggested that the Federation Assembly Daily Record should be translated into the medium . A colossal campaign opened to sell more sexual organs of plants and Mrs. Joseph ( `` Shadow of Greatness '' ) Douglas was quoted as saying : `` I would no more sit down without flowers on my table than without serviettes '' . A Tibetan swami from Palermo , Sicily , announced in Beverly Hills a newly discovered , ancient yoga discipline for ripple breathing which increased both pranha and cosmic attraction between sexes . His chelas were required to assume the matsyendra posture dressed in hand-woven diapers while he read aloud from Rig-Veda and an assistant guru examined their purses in another room -- nothing was stolen ; ; the purpose was less immediate . The President of the United States proclaimed the first Sunday in November as `` National Grandmothers' Day '' and urged America to say it with flowers . A funeral parlor chain was indicted for price-cutting . Fosterite bishops , after secret conclave , announced the Church's second Major Miracle : Supreme Bishop Digby had been translated bodily to Heaven and spot-promoted to Archangel , ranking with-but-after Archangel Foster . The glorious news had been held up pending Heavenly confirmation of the elevation of a new Supreme Bishop , Huey Short -- a candidate accepted by the Boone faction after lots had been cast repeatedly . L'Unita and Hoy published identical denunciations of Short's elevation , l'Osservatore Romano and the Christian Science Monitor ignored it , Times of India snickered at it , and the Manchester Guardian simply reported it -- the Fosterites in England were few but extremely militant . Digby was not pleased with his promotion . The Man from Mars had interrupted him with his work half finished -- and that stupid jackass Short was certain to louse it up . Foster listened with angelic patience until Digby ran down , then said , `` Listen , junior , you're an angel now -- so forget it . Eternity is no time for recriminations . You too were a stupid jackass until you poisoned me . Afterwards you did well enough . Now that Short is Supreme Bishop he'll do all right , he can't help it . Same as with the Popes . Some of them were warts until they got promoted . Check with one of them , go ahead -- there's no professional jealousy here '' . Digby calmed down , but made one request . Foster shook his halo . `` You can't touch him . You shouldn't have tried to . Oh , you can submit a requisition for a miracle if you want to make a fool of yourself . But , I'm telling you , it'll be turned down -- you don't understand the System yet . The Martians have their own setup , different from ours , and as long as they need him , we can't touch him . They run their show their way -- the Universe has variety , something for everybody -- a fact you field workers often miss '' . `` You mean this punk can brush me aside and I've got to hold still for it '' ? ? `` I held still for the same thing , didn't I ? ? I'm helping you now , am I not ? ? Now look , there's work to be done and lots of it . The Boss wants performance , not gripes . If you need a Day off to calm down , duck over to the Muslim Paradise and take it . Otherwise , straighten your halo , square your wings , and dig in . The sooner you act like an angel the quicker you'll feel angelic . Get Happy , junior '' ! ! Digby heaved a deep ethereal sigh . `` Okay , I'm Happy . Where do I start '' ? ? Jubal did not hear of Digby's disappearance when it was announced , and , when he did , while he had a fleeting suspicion , he dismissed it ; ; if Mike had had a finger in it , he had gotten away with it -- and what happened to supreme bishops worried Jubal not at all as long as he wasn't bothered . His household had gone through an upset . Jubal deduced what had happened but did not know with whom -- and didn't want to inquire . Mike was of legal age and presumed able to defend himself in the clinches . Anyhow , it was high time the boy was salted . Jubal couldn't reconstruct the crime from the way the girls behaved because patterns kept shifting -- ABC vs D , then BCD vs A or AB vs CD , or AD vs CB , through all ways that four women can gang up on each other . This continued most of the week following that ill-starred trip to church , during which period Mike stayed in his room and usually in a trance so deep that Jubal would have pronounced him dead had he not seen it before . Jubal would not have minded it if service had not gone to pieces . The girls seemed to spend half their time tiptoeing in `` to see if Mike was all right '' and they were too preoccupied to cook , much less be secretaries . Even rock-steady Anne -- Hell , Anne was the worst ! ! Absent-minded , subject to unexplained tears Jubal would have bet his life that if Anne were to witness the Second Coming , she would memorize date , time , personae , events , and barometric pressure without batting her calm blue eyes . The expense and time involved are astronomical . However , we sent a third vessel out , a much smaller and faster one than the first two . We have learned much about interstellar drives since a hundred years ago ; ; that is all I can tell you about them . `` But the third ship came back several years ago and reported '' `` That it had found a planet on which human beings could live and which was already inhabited by sentient beings '' ! ! Said Hal , forgetting in his enthusiasm that he had not been asked to speak . Macneff stopped pacing to stare at Hal with his pale blue eyes . `` How did you know '' ? ? He said sharply . `` Forgive me , Sandalphon '' , said Hal . `` But it was inevitable ! ! Did not the Forerunner predict in his Time and the World Line that such a planet would be found ? ? I believe it was on page 573 '' ! ! Macneff smiled and said , `` I am glad that your scriptural lessons have left such an impression '' . How could they not ? ? Thought Hal . Besides , they were not the only impressions . I still bear scars on my back where Pornsen , my gapt , whipped me because I had not learned my lessons well enough . He was a good impresser , that Pornsen . Was ? ? Is ! ! As I grew older and was promoted , so was he , always where I was . He was my gapt in the creche . He was the dormitory gapt when I went to college and thought I was getting away from him . He is now my block gapt . He is the one responsible for my getting such low M. R.'s . Swiftly , came the revulsion , the protest . No , not he , for I , and I alone , am responsible for whatever happens to me . If I get a low M. R. , I do so because I want it that way or my dark self does . If I die , I die because I willed it so . So , forgive me , Sigmen , for the contrary-to-reality thoughts ! ! `` Please pardon me again , Sandalphon '' , said Hal . `` But did the expedition find any records of the Forerunner having been on this planet ? ? Perhaps , even , though this is too much to wish , find the Forerunner himself '' ? ? `` No '' , said Macneff . `` Though that does not mean that there may not be such records there . The expedition was under orders to make a swift survey of conditions and then to return to Earth . I can't tell you now the distance in lightyears or what star this was , though you can see it with the naked eye at night in this hemisphere . If you volunteer , you will be told where you're going after the ship leaves . And it leaves very soon '' . `` You need a linguist '' ? ? Said Hal . `` The ship is huge '' , said Macneff , `` but the number of military men and specialists we are taking limits the linguists to one . We have considered several of your professionals because they were lamechians and above suspicion . Unfortunately '' Hal waited : Macneff paced some more , frowning . Then , he said , `` Unfortunately , only one lamechian linguist exists , and he is too old for this expedition . Therefore '' `` A thousand pardons '' , said Hal . `` But I have just thought of one thing . I am married '' . `` No problem at all '' , said Macneff . `` There will be no women aboard the Gabriel . And , if a man is married , he will automatically be given a divorce '' . Hal gasped , and he said , `` A divorce '' ? ? Macneff raised his hands apologetically and said , `` You are horrified , of course . But , from our reading of the Western Talmud , we Urielites believe that the Forerunner , knowing this situation would arise , made reference to and provision for divorce . It's inevitable in this case , for the couple will be separated for , at the least , forty years . Naturally , he couched the provision in obscure language . In his great and glorious wisdom , he knew that our enemies the Israelites must not be able to read therein what we planned '' . `` I volunteer '' , said Hal . `` Tell me more , Sandalphon '' . Six months later , Hal Yarrow stood in the observation dome of the Gabriel and watched the ball of Earth dwindle above him . It was night on this hemisphere , but the light blazed from the megalopolises of Australia , Japan , China , Southeast Asia , India , Siberia . Hal , the linguist , saw the glittering discs and necklaces in terms of the languages spoken therein . Australia , the Philippine Islands , Japan , and northern China were inhabited by those members of the Haijac Union that spoke American . Southern China , all of southeast Asia , southern India and Ceylon , these states of the Malay Federation spoke Bazaar . Siberia spoke Icelandic . His mind turned the globe swiftly for him , and he visualized Africa , which used Swahili south of the Sahara Sea . All around the Mediterranean Sea , Asia Minor , northern India , and Tibet , Hebrew was the native tongue . In southern Europe , between the Israeli Republics and the Icelandic-speaking peoples of northern Europe , was a thin but long stretch of territory called March . This was no man's land , disputed by the Haijac Union and the Israeli Republic , a potential source of war for the last two hundred years . Neither nation would give up their claim on it , yet neither wished to make any move that might lead to a second Apocalyptic War . So , for all practical purposes , it was an independent nation and by now had its own organized government ( unrecognized outside its own borders ) . Its citizens spoke all of the world's surviving tongues , plus a new one called Lingo , a pidgin whose vocabulary was derived from the other six and whose syntax was so simple it could be contained on half a sheet of paper . Hal saw in his mind the rest of Earth : Iceland , Greenland , the Caribbean Islands , and the eastern half of South America . Here the peoples spoke the tongue of Iceland because that island had gotten the jump on the Hawaiian-Americans who were busy resettling North America and the western half of South America after the Apocalyptic War . Then there was North America , where American was the native speech of all except the twenty descendants of French-Canadians living on the Hudson Bay Preserve . Hal knew that when that side of Earth rotated into the night zone , Sigmen City would blaze out into space . And , somewhere in that enormous light , was his apartment . But Mary would soon no longer be living there , for she would be notified in a few days that her husband had died in an accident while on a flight to Tahiti . She would weep in private , he was sure , for she loved him in her frigid way , though in public she would be dry-eyed . Her friends and professional associates would sympathize with her , not because she had lost a beloved husband , but because she had been married to a man who thought unrealistically . If Hal Yarrow had been killed in a crash , he must have wanted it that way . There was no such thing as an `` accident '' . Somehow , all the other passengers ( also supposed to have died in this web of elaborate frauds to cover up the disappearance of the personnel of the Gabriel ) had simultaneously `` agreed '' to die . And , therefore , being in disgrace , they would not be cremated and their ashes flung to the winds in public ceremony . No , the fish could eat their bodies for all the Sturch cared . Hal felt sorry for Mary ; ; he had a time keeping the tears from welling to his own eyes as he stood in the crowd in the observation dome . Yet , he told himself , this was the best way . He and Mary would no longer have to tear and rend at each other ; ; their mutual torture would be over . Mary was free to marry again , not knowing that the Sturch had secretly given her a divorce , thinking that death had dissolved her marriage . She would have a year in which to make up her mind , to choose a mate from a list selected by her gapt . Perhaps , the psychological barriers that had prevented her from conceiving Hal's child would no longer be present . Perhaps . Hal doubted if this happy event would occur . Mary was as frozen below the navel as he . No matter who the candidate for marriage selected by the gapt The gapt . Pornsen . He would no longer have to see that fat face , hear that whining voice `` Hal Yarrow '' ! ! Said the whining voice . And , slowly , feeling himself icy yet burning , Hal turned . There was the squat loose-jowled man , smiling lopsidedly up at him . `` My beloved ward , my perennial gadfly '' , said the whining voice . `` I had no idea that you , too , would be on this glorious voyage . But I might have known ! ! We seem to be bound by love ; ; Sigmen himself must have foreseen it . Love to you , my ward '' . `` Sigmen love you , too , my guardian '' , said Hal , choking . `` How wonderful to see your cherished self . I had thought we would never again speak to each other '' . 5 the Gabriel pointed towards her destination and , under one-gee acceleration , began to build up towards her ultimate velocity , 99.1 percent of the speed of light . Meanwhile , all the personnel except those few needed to carry out the performance of the ship , went into the suspensor . Here they would lie in suspended animation for many years . Some time later , after a check had been made of all automatic equipment , the crew would join the others . They would sleep while the Gabriel's drive would increase the acceleration to a point which the unfrozen bodies of the personnel could not have endured . Upon reaching the desired speed , the automatic equipment would cut off the drive , and the silent but not empty vessel would hurl towards the star which was its journey's end . Many years later , the photon-counting apparatus in the nose of the ship would determine that the star was close enough to actuate deceleration . Again , a force too strong for unfrozen bodies to endure would be applied . Then , after slowing the vessel considerably , the drive would adjust to a one-gee deceleration . And the crew would be automatically brought out of their suspended animation . These members would then unthaw the rest of the personnel . And , in the half-year left before reaching their destination , the men would carry out whatever preparations were needed . Hal Yarrow was among the last to go into the suspensor and among the first to come out . He had to study the recordings of the language of the chief nation of Ozagen , Siddo . And , from the first , he faced a difficult task . The expedition that had discovered Ozagen had succeeded in correlating two thousand Siddo words with an equal number of American words . The description of the Siddo syntax was very restricted . And , as Hal found out , obviously mistaken in many cases . This discovery caused Hal anxiety . His duty was to write a school text and to teach the entire personnel of the Gabriel how to speak Ozagen . Yet , if he used all of the little means at his disposal , he would be instructing his students wrongly . Moreover , even getting this across would be difficult . For one thing , the organs of speech of the Ozagen natives differed somewhat from Earthmen's ; ; the sounds made by these organs were , therefore , dissimilar . It was true that they could be approximated , but would the Ozagenians understand these approximations ? ? Another obstacle was the grammatical construction of Siddo . Consider the tense system . Instead of inflecting a verb or using an unattached particle to indicate the past or future , Siddo used an entirely different word . Thus , the masculine animate infinitive dabhumaksanigalu'ahai , meaning to live , was , in the perfect tense , ksu'u'peli'afo , and , in the future , mai'teipa . The same use of an entirely different word applied for all the other tenses . Plus the fact that Siddo not only had the normal ( to Earthmen ) three genders of masculine , feminine , and neuter , but the two extra of inanimate and spiritual . Fortunately , gender was inflected , though the expression of it would be difficult for anybody not born in Siddo . The system of indicating gender varied according to tense . All the other parts of speech : nouns , pronouns , adjectives , adverbs , and conjunctions operated under the same system as the verbs . This was not , for the Angel , just a matter of running through a logical or deductive chain , or deciding on some action from some already established premise . No doubt the Angels could do that kind of thing as fast as any computer . What Gabriel was being asked to do now , however , was to re-examine all his basic assumptions , make value-judgments on them , and give them new and different powers in his mind to govern his motives . This is not wholly a reasoning process -- a computer cannot do it all -- and even in an Angel it takes time . ( Or , perhaps , especially in an Angel , whose assumptions had mostly been fixed millions of years ago . ) Being reasonably sure of the reason for the long pause , however , did not make it seem any less long to Jack . He had already become used to Hesperus' snapping back answers to questions almost before Jack could get them asked . There was nothing he could do but wait . The dice were cast . At last Gabriel spoke . `` We misjudged you '' , he said slowly . `` We had concluded that no race as ephemeral as yours could have had time to develop a sense of justice . Of course we have before us the example of the great races at the galactic center ; ; individually they are nearly as mortal as you -- the difference does not seem very marked to us , where it exists . But they have survived for long periods as races , whereas you are young . We shall recommend to them that they shorten your trial period by half . `` For now , it is clear that we were in the wrong . You may reclaim your property , and the penalty on Hesperus is lifted . Hesperus , you may speak '' . `` I did not perceive this essential distinction either , First-Born '' , Hesperus said at once , `` I was only practicing a concept that Jack taught me , called a deal '' . `` Nevertheless , you were its agent . Jack , what is the nature of this concept '' ? ? `` It's a kind of agreement in which each party gives something to the other '' , Jack said . `` We regard it as fair only when each party feels that what he has received is as valuable , or more valuable , than what he has given '' . His heart , he discovered , was pounding . `` For instance , Hesperus agreed to help me find my property , and I agreed to take him to Earth . Between individuals , this process is called bargaining . When it is done between races or nations , it is called making a treaty . And the major part of my mission to your nest is to make a treaty between your race and mine . Recovering the property was much less important '' . `` Strange '' , Gabriel said . `` And apparently impossible . Though it might be that we would have much to give you , you have nothing to give us '' . `` Hesperus and Lucifer '' , Jack said , `` show that we do '' . Another pause ; ; but this one was not nearly as long . `` Then it is a matter of pleasure ; ; of curiosity ; ; of a more alive time . Yes , those could be commodities under this concept . But you should understand , Jack , that Hesperus and Lucifer are not long out of the nursery . Visiting the Earth would not be an offering of worth to those of us who are older '' . This explained a great deal . `` All the more reason , then '' , Jack said , `` why we must have a treaty . We will gladly entertain your young and give them proper living quarters , in return for their help in running our fusion reactors . But we must know if this is in accordance with your customs , and must have your agreement they will not misuse the power we put in their hands , to our hurt '' . `` But this simply requires that they behave in accordance with the dictates of their own natures , and respect yours in turn . To this we of course agree '' . Jack felt a wave of complete elation , but in a second it had vanished without a trace . What Gabriel was asking was that mankind forego all its parochial moral judgments , and contract to let the Angels serve on Earth as it is in Heaven regardless of the applicable Earth laws . The Angels in turn would exercise similar restraints in respect for the natural preferences and natures of the Earthmen -- but they had no faintest notion of man's perverse habit of passing and enforcing laws which were contrary to his own preferences and violations of his nature . The simple treaty principle that Gabriel was asking him to ratify , in short , was nothing less than total trust . Nothing less would serve . And it might be , considering the uncomfortable custom the Angels had of thinking of everything in terms of absolutes , that the proposal of anything less might well amount instead to something like a declaration of war . Furthermore , even the highly trained law clerk who was a part of Jack's total make-up could not understand how the principle could ever be codified . Almost the whole experience of mankind pointed toward suspicion , not trust , as the safest and sanest attitude toward all outsiders . Yet there was some precedent for it . The history of disarmament agreements , for instance , had been unreassuringly dismal ; ; but the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics nevertheless did eventually agree on an atomic bomb test ban , and a sort of provisional acceptance of each other's good intentions on this limited question . Out of that agreement , though not by any easy road , eventually emerged the present world hegemony of the United Nations ; ; suspicion between member states still existed , but it was of about the same low order of virulence as the twentieth-century rivalry between Arizona and California over water supplies . Besides , agreements `` in principle '' , with the petty details to be thrashed out later , were commonplace in diplomatic history . The trouble with them was that they almost never worked , and in fact an agreement `` in principle '' historically turned out to be a sure sign that neither party really wanted the quarrel settled . Suppose that this one were to work ? ? There was no question in Jack's mind of the good faith on one side , at least . If mankind could be convinced of that It was worth trying . In fact , it had to be tried . It would be at once the most tentative and most final treaty that Earth had ever signed . Secretary Hart had taught Jack , at least partially , to be content with small beginnings in all diplomatic matters ; ; but there was no small way to handle this one . He turned back to the screens , the crucial , conclusive phrase on his lips . But he was too late . He had lost his audience . For a moment he could make no sense at all of what he saw . It seemed to be only a riot of color , light and meaningless activity . Gradually , he realized that the pentagon of Angel elders had vanished , and that the ritual learning dance of the nursery had been broken up . The Angels in the nursery were zigzagging wildly in all directions , seemingly at random . `` Hesperus ! ! What's going on here ? ? What's happened '' ? ? `` Your brothers have been found . They are on their way here '' . `` Where ? ? I don't see them . The instruments don't show them '' . `` You can't see them yet , Jack . They'll be in range in a short while '' . Jack scanned the skies , the boards , and the skies again . Nothing . No -- there was a tiny pip on the radar ; ; and it was getting bigger rapidly . If that was the skiff , it was making unprecedented speed . Then the skiff hove into sight , just a dot of light at first against the roiling blackness and crimson streaks of the Coal Sack . Through the telescope , Jack could see that both spacesuits were still attached to it . The sail was still unfurled , though there were a good many holes in it , as Langer had predicted would be the case by now . It was a startling , almost numenous sight ; ; but even more awesome was the fact that it was trailing an enormous comet's-tail of Angels . The skiff was not heading for the nursery , however . It seemed unlikely that her crew , if either of them were alive , could even see the Ariadne , for they were passing her at a distance of nearly a light-year . And there would be no chance of signaling them -- without the Nernst generator Jack could not send a call powerful enough to get through all the static , and by the time he could rebuild his fusion power the skiff would be gone . Fuming , helpless , he watched them pass him . The sail , ragged though it was , still had enough surface to catch some of the ocean of power being poured out from the nursery stars . He would never have believed , without seeing it , that the bizarre little vessel could go so fast . But where was it going ? ? And why was it causing so much agitation among the Angels , and being followed by so many of them ? ? There was only one possible answer , but Jack's horrified mind refused to believe it until he had fed the radar plots of the skiff's course into the computer . The curve on the card the computer spat back at him couldn't be argued with , however . The skiff was headed for the very center of the nebula -- toward that place which , Jack knew now , could hold nothing less important than the very core of the Angel's life and religion . It was clear that Langer had at last found a way to attract the Angel's attention . It was equally clear that as of this moment , the treaty was off . Stern chase 10 Langer would have to be headed off , whether he knew where he was going or not . Almost surely he did ; ; after all , he had had the same set of facts as Jack had had to work from , and he was an almost frighteningly observant man . But not having talked to the Angels , he had made a wrong turn in his reasoning somewhere along the line . Had he decided , perhaps , that the center of the cloud was a center of government , instead of a center of life and faith '' ? ? But it didn't matter now whether he meant to invade the Holy of Holies , or was simply headed in that direction by accident . If it was intentional , it was now also unnecessary ; ; and whether intentional or not , the outcome would be disastrous . Jack crawled under the boards and restored the six feet of lead line he had excised from the Nernst generator switch . When he was back on his feet again and about to reinstall the fuses , however , he hesitated . He had to have fusion power to catch up with the skiff , and he had to have it fast . But fusion power in the Coal Sack was what had triggered all the trouble in the first place -- and he already had an Angel aboard . `` Hesperus '' ? ? `` Receiving '' . `` I'm going to turn my generator back on , as I promised to do . But I can't take you to Earth yet . First I've got to intercept my brothers before they get any deeper into trouble . Will you obstruct this , or will you help ? ? I know it's not part of the bargain , and your elders might not like it '' . `` Nobody else can live in your hearth while I am in it '' , Hesperus said promptly . `` As for my elders , they have already admitted that they were wrong . If because of this incident they become angry with Earth , I will not be permitted to go there at all . Therefore of course I will help '' . With a short-lived sigh of relief , Jack plugged the fuses back in and threw the switch . Without an instant's transition , the green light that meant full fusion power winked on the board . Always before , it had taken five minutes to -- Of course . Hesperus was in there . From here on out , the Ariadne was going to be hotter than any space cruiser man had ever dreamed of . But since he had failed to anticipate it , he lost the five minutes anyhow , in plotting an intercept orbit . `` Hesperus , don't use this t-tau vector trick of yours , please . Ryan hefted his bulk up and supported it on one elbow . He rubbed his eyes sleepily with one huge paw . `` Ekstrohm , Nogol , you guys okay '' ? ? `` Nothing wrong with me that couldn't be cured '' , Nogol said . He didn't say what would cure him ; ; he had been explaining all during the trip what he needed to make him feel like himself . His small black eyes darted inside the olive oval of his face . `` Ekstrohm '' ? ? Ryan insisted . `` Okay '' . `` Well , let's take a ground-level look at the country around here '' . The facsiport rolled open on the landscape . A range of bluffs hugged the horizon , the color of decaying moss . Above them , the sky was the black of space , or the almost equal black of the winter sky above Minneapolis , seen against neon-lit snow . That cold , empty sky was full of fire and light . It seemed almost a magnification of the Galaxy itself , of the Milky Way , blown up by some master photographer . This fiery swath was actually only a belt of minor planets , almost like the asteroid belt in the original Solar System . These planets were much bigger , nearly all capable of holding an atmosphere . But to the infuriation of scientists , for no known reason not all of them did . This would be the fifth mapping expedition to the planetoids of Yancy-6 in three generations . They lay months away from the nearest Earth star by jump drive , and no one knew what they were good for , although it was felt that they would probably be good for something if it could only be discovered -- much like the continent of Antarctica in ancient history . `` How can a planet with so many neighbors be so lonely '' ? ? Ryan asked . He was the captain , so he could ask questions like that . `` Some can be lonely in a crowd '' , Nogol said elaborately . `` What will we need outside , Ryan '' ? ? Ekstrohm asked . `` No helmets '' , the captain answered . `` We can breathe out there , all right . It just won't be easy . This old world lost all of its helium and trace gases long ago . Nitrogen and oxygen are about it '' . `` Ryan , look over there '' , Nogol said . `` Animals . Ringing the ship . Think they're intelligent , maybe hostile '' ? ? `` I think they're dead '' , Ekstrohm interjected quietly . `` I get no readings from them at all . Sonic , electronic , galvanic -- all blank . According to these needles , they're stone dead '' . `` Ekstrohm , you and I will have a look '' , Ryan said . `` You hold down the fort , Nogol . Take it easy '' . `` Easy '' , Nogol confirmed . `` I heard a story once about a rookie who got excited when the captain stepped outside and he couldn't get an encephalographic reading on him . Me , I know the mind of an officer works in a strange and unfathomable manner '' . `` I'm not worried about you mis-reading the dials , Nogol , just about a lug like you reading them at all . Remember , when the little hand is straight up that's negative . Positive results start when it goes towards the hand you use to make your mark '' . `` But I'm ambidextrous '' . Ryan told him what he could do then . Ekstrohm smiled , and followed the captain through the airlock with only a glance at the lapel gauge on his coverall . The strong negative field his suit set up would help to repel bacteria and insects . Actually , the types of infection that could attack a warm-blooded mammal were not infinite , and over the course of the last few hundred years adequate defenses had been found for all basic categories . He wasn't likely to come down with hot chills and puzzling striped fever . They ignored the ladder down to the planet surface and , with only a glance at the seismological gauge to judge surface resistance , dropped to the ground . It was day , but in the thin atmosphere contrasts were sharp between light and shadow . They walked from midnight to noon , noon to midnight , and came to the beast sprawled on its side . Ekstrohm nudged it with a boot . `` Hey , this is pretty close to a wart-hog '' . `` Uh-huh '' , Ryan admitted . `` One of the best matches I've ever found . Well , it has to happen . Statistical average and all . Still , it sometimes gives you a creepy feeling to find a rabbit or a snapping turtle on some strange world . It makes you wonder if this exploration business isn't all some big joke , and somebody has been everywhere before you even started '' . The surveyor looked sidewise at the captain . The big man seldom gave out with such thoughts . Ekstrohm cleared his throat . `` What shall we do with this one ? ? Dissect it '' ? ? Ryan nudged it with his toe , following Ekstrohm's example . `` I don't know , Stormy . It sure as hell doesn't look like any dominant intelligent species to me . No hands , for one thing . Of course , that's not definite proof '' . `` No , it isn't '' , Ekstrohm said . `` I think we'd better let it lay until we get a clearer picture of the ecological setup around here . In the meantime , we might be thinking on the problem all these dead beasts represent . What killed them '' ? ? `` It looks like we did , when we made blastdown '' . `` But what about our landing was lethal to the creatures '' ? ? `` Radiation '' ? ? Ekstrohm suggested . `` The planet is very low in radiation from mineral deposits , and the atmosphere seems to shield out most of the solar output . Any little dose of radiation might knock off these critters '' . `` I don't know about that . Maybe it would work the other way . Maybe because they have had virtually no radioactive exposure and don't have any R's stored up , they could take a lot without harm '' . `` Then maybe it was the shockwave we set up . Or maybe it's sheer xenophobia . They curl up and die at the sight of something strange and alien -- like a spaceship '' . `` Maybe '' , the captain admitted . `` At this stage of the game anything could be possible . But there's one possibility I particularly don't like '' . `` And that is '' ? ? `` Suppose it was not us that killed these aliens . Suppose it is something right on the planet , native to it . I just hope it doesn't work on Earthmen too . These critters went real sudden '' . Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and thought , the camp is quiet . The Earthmen made camp outside the spaceship . There was no reason to leave the comfortable quarters inside the ship , except that , faced with a possibility of sleeping on solid ground , they simply had to get out . The camp was a cluster of aluminum bubbles , ringed with a spy web to alert the Earthmen to the approach of any being . Each man had a bubble to himself , privacy after the long period of enforced intimacy on board the ship . Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and listened to the sounds of the night on Yancey-6 138 . There was a keening of wind , and a cracking of the frozen ground . Insects there were on the world , but they were frozen solid during the night , only to revive and thaw in the morning sun . The bunk he lay on was much more uncomfortable than the acceleration couches on board . Yet he knew the others were sleeping more soundly , now that they had renewed their contact with the matter that had birthed them to send them riding high vacuum . Ekstrohm was not asleep . Now there could be an end to pretending . He threw off the light blanket and swung his feet off the bunk , to the floor . Ekstrohm stood up . There was no longer any need to hide . But what was there to do ? ? What had changed for him ? ? He no longer had to lie in his bunk all night , his eyes closed , pretending to sleep . In privacy he could walk around , leave the light on , read . It was small comfort for insomnia . Ekstrohm never slept . Some doctors had informed him he was mistaken about this . Actually , they said , he did sleep , but so shortly and fitfully that he forgot . Others admitted he was absolutely correct -- he never slept . His body processes only slowed down enough for him to dispell fatigue poisons . Occasionally he fell into a waking , gritty-eyed stupor ; ; but he never slept . Never at all . Naturally , he couldn't let his shipmates know this . Insomnia would ground him from the Exploration Service , on physiological if not psychological grounds . He had to hide it . Over the years , he had had buddies in space in whom he thought he could confide . The buddies invariably took advantage of him . Since he couldn't sleep anyway , he might as well stand their watches for them or write their reports . Where the hell did he get off threatening to report any laxness on their part to the captain ? ? A man with insomnia had better avoid bad dreams of that kind if he knew what was good for him . Ekstrohm had to hide his secret . In a camp , instead of shipboard , hiding the secret was easier . But the secret itself was just as hard . Ekstrohm picked up a lightweight no-back from the ship's library , a book by Bloch , the famous twentieth century expert on sex . He scanned a few lines on the social repercussions of a celebrated nineteenth century sex murderer , but he couldn't seem to concentrate on the weighty , pontifical , ponderous style . On impulse , he flipped up the heat control on his coverall and slid back the hatch of the bubble . Ekstrohm walked through the alien glass and looked up at the unfamiliar constellations , smelling the frozen sterility of the thin air . Behind him , his mates stirred without waking . Ekstrohm was startled in the morning by a banging on the hatch of his bubble . It took him a few seconds to put his thoughts in order , and then he got up from the bunk where he had been resting , sleeplessly . The angry burnt-red face of Ryan greeted him . `` Okay , Stormy , this isn't the place for fun and games . What did you do with them '' ? ? `` Do with what '' ? ? `` The dead beasties . All the dead animals laying around the ship '' . `` What are you talking about , Ryan ? ? What do you think I did with them '' ? ? `` I don't know . All I know is that they are gone '' . `` Gone '' ? ? Ekstrohm shouldered his way outside and scanned the veldt . There was no ring of animal corpses . Nothing . Nothing but wispy grass whipping in the keen breeze . `` I'll be damned '' , Ekstrohm said . `` You are right now , buddy . ExPe doesn't like anybody mucking up primary evidence '' . `` Where do you get off , Ryan '' ? ? Ekstrohm demanded . `` Why pick me for your patsy ? ? This has got to be some kind of local phenomenon . Why accuse a shipmate of being behind this '' ? ? `` Listen , Ekstrohm , I want to give you the benefit of every doubt . But you aren't exactly the model of a surveyor , you know . You've been riding on a pink ticket for six years , you know that '' . `` No '' , Ekstrohm said , `` No , I didn't know that '' . `` You've been hiding things from me and Nogol every jump we've made with you . Now comes this ! ! It fits the pattern of secrecy and stealth you've been involved in '' . `` What could I do with your lousy dead bodies ? ? What would I want with them '' ? ? `` All I know is that you were outside the bubbles last night , and you were the only sentient being who came in or out of our alarm web . The tapes show that . Now all the bodies are missing , like they got up and walked away '' . It was not a new experience to Ekstrohm . No . Suspicion wasn't new to him at all . `` Ryan , there are other explanations for the disappearance of the bodies . Look for them , will you ? ? I give you my word I'm not trying to pull some stupid kind of joke , or to deliberately foul up the expedition . Take my word , can't you '' ? ? Ryan shook his head . `` I don't think I can . There's still such a thing as mental illness . You may not be responsible '' . Ekstrohm scowled . `` Don't try anything violent , Stormy . I outweigh you fifty pounds and I'm fast for a big man '' . `` I wasn't planning on jumping you . Why do you have to jump me the first time something goes wrong ? ? She lived and was given a name . Helva . For her first three vegetable months she waved her crabbed claws , kicked weakly with her clubbed feet and enjoyed the usual routine of the infant . She was not alone for there were three other such children in the big city's special nursery . Soon they all were removed to Central Laboratory School where their delicate transformation began . One of the babies died in the initial transferral but of Helva's `` class '' , seventeen thrived in the metal shells . Instead of kicking feet , Helva's neural responses started her wheels ; ; instead of grabbing with hands , she manipulated mechanical extensions . As she matured , more and more neural synapses would be adjusted to operate other mechanisms that went into the maintenance and running of a space ship . For Helva was destined to be the `` brain '' half of a scout ship , partnered with a man or a woman , whichever she chose , as the mobile half . She would be among the elite of her kind . Her initial intelligence tests registered above normal and her adaptation index was unusually high . As long as her development within her shell lived up to expectations , and there were no side-effects from the pituitary tinkering , Helva would live a rewarding , rich and unusual life , a far cry from what she would have faced as an ordinary , `` normal '' being . However , no diagram of her brain patterns , no early I.Q. tests recorded certain essential facts about Helva that Central must eventually learn . They would have to bide their official time and see , trusting that the massive doses of shell-psychology would suffice her , too , as the necessary bulwark against her unusual confinement and the pressures of her profession . A ship run by a human brain could not run rogue or insane with the power and resources Central had to build into their scout ships . Brain ships were , of course , long past the experimental stages . Most babes survived the techniques of pituitary manipulation that kept their bodies small , eliminating the necessity of transfers from smaller to larger shells . And very , very few were lost when the final connection was made to the control panels of ship or industrial combine . Shell people resembled mature dwarfs in size whatever their natal deformities were , but the well-oriented brain would not have changed places with the most perfect body in the Universe . So , for happy years , Helva scooted around in her shell with her classmates , playing such games as Stall , Power-Seek , studying her lessons in trajectory , propulsion techniques , computation , logistics , mental hygiene , basic alien psychology , philology , space history , law , traffic , codes : all the et ceteras that eventually became compounded into a reasoning , logical , informed citizen . Not so obvious to her , but of more importance to her teachers , Helva ingested the precepts of her conditioning as easily as she absorbed her nutrient fluid . She would one day be grateful to the patient drone of the sub-conscious-level instruction . Helva's civilization was not without busy , do-good associations , exploring possible inhumanities to terrestrial as well as extraterrestrial citizens . One such group got all incensed over shelled `` children '' when Helva was just turning fourteen . When they were forced to , Central Worlds shrugged its shoulders , arranged a tour of the Laboratory Schools and set the tour off to a big start by showing the members case histories , complete with photographs . Very few committees ever looked past the first few photos . Most of their original objections about `` shells '' were overridden by the relief that these hideous ( to them ) bodies were mercifully concealed . Helva's class was doing Fine Arts , a selective subject in her crowded program . She had activated one of her microscopic tools which she would later use for minute repairs to various parts of her control panel . Her subject was large -- a copy of the Last Supper -- and her canvas , small -- the head of a tiny screw . She had tuned her sight to the proper degree . As she worked she absentmindedly crooned , producing a curious sound . Shell people used their own vocal cords and diaphragms but sound issued through microphones rather than mouths . Helva's hum then had a curious vibrancy , a warm , dulcet quality even in its aimless chromatic wanderings . `` Why , what a lovely voice you have '' , said one of the female visitors . Helva `` looked '' up and caught a fascinating panorama of regular , dirty craters on a flaky pink surface . Her hum became a gurgle of surprise . She instinctively regulated her `` sight '' until the skin lost its cratered look and the pores assumed normal proportions . `` Yes , we have quite a few years of voice training , madam '' , remarked Helva calmly . `` Vocal peculiarities often become excessively irritating during prolonged intra-stellar distances and must be eliminated . I enjoyed my lessons '' . Although this was the first time that Helva had seen unshelled people , she took this experience calmly . Any other reaction would have been reported instantly . `` I meant that you have a nice singing voice dear '' , the lady amended . `` Thank you . Would you like to see my work '' ? ? Helva asked , politely . She instinctively sheered away from personal discussions but she filed the comment away for further meditation . `` Work '' ? ? Asked the lady . `` I am currently reproducing the Last Supper on the head of a screw '' . `` No , I say '' , the lady twittered . Helva turned her vision back to magnification and surveyed her copy critically . `` Of course , some of my color values do not match the old Master's and the perspective is faulty but I believe it to be a fair copy '' . The lady's eyes , unmagnified , bugged out . `` Oh , I forget '' , and Helva's voice was really contrite . If she could have blushed , she would have . `` You people don't have adjustable vision '' . The monitor of this discourse grinned with pride and amusement as Helva's tone indicated pity for the unfortunate . `` Here , this will help '' , suggested Helva , substituting a magnifying device in one extension and holding it over the picture . In a kind of shock , the ladies and gentlemen of the committee bent to observe the incredibly copied and brilliantly executed Last Supper on the head of a screw . `` Well '' , remarked one gentleman who had been forced to accompany his wife , `` the good Lord can eat where angels fear to tread '' . `` Are you referring , sir '' , asked Helva politely , `` to the Dark Age discussions of the number of angels who could stand on the head of a pin '' ? ? `` I had that in mind '' . `` If you substitute ' atom ' for ' angel ' , the problem is not insoluble , given the metallic content of the pin in question '' . `` Which you are programed to compute '' ? ? `` Of course '' . `` Did they remember to program a sense of humor , as well , young lady '' ? ? `` We are directed to develop a sense of proportion , sir , which contributes the same effect '' . The good man chortled appreciatively and decided the trip was worth his time . If the investigation committee spent months digesting the thoughtful food served them at the Laboratory School , they left Helva with a morsel as well . `` Singing '' as applicable to herself required research . She had , of course , been exposed to and enjoyed a music appreciation course which had included the better known classical works such as `` Tristan und Isolde '' , `` Candide '' , `` Oklahoma '' , `` Nozze de Figaro '' , the atomic age singers , Eileen Farrell , Elvis Presley and Geraldine Todd , as well as the curious rhythmic progressions of the Venusians , Capellan visual chromatics and the sonic concerti of the Altairians . But `` singing '' for any shell person posed considerable technical difficulties to be overcome . Shell people were schooled to examine every aspect of a problem or situation before making a prognosis . Balanced properly between optimism and practicality , the nondefeatist attitude of the shell people led them to extricate themselves , their ships and personnel , from bizarre situations . Therefore to Helva , the problem that she couldn't open her mouth to sing , among other restrictions , did not bother her . She would work out a method , by-passing her limitations , whereby she could sing . She approached the problem by investigating the methods of sound reproduction through the centuries , human and instrumental . Her own sound production equipment was essentially more instrumental than vocal . Breath control and the proper enunciation of vowel sounds within the oral cavity appeared to require the most development and practice . Shell people did not , strictly speaking , breathe . For their purposes , oxygen and other gases were not drawn from the surrounding atmosphere through the medium of lungs but sustained artificially by solution in their shells . After experimentation , Helva discovered that she could manipulate her diaphragmic unit to sustain tone . By relaxing the throat muscles and expanding the oral cavity well into the frontal sinuses , she could direct the vowel sounds into the most felicitous position for proper reproduction through her throat microphone . She compared the results with tape recordings of modern singers and was not unpleased although her own tapes had a peculiar quality about them , not at all unharmonious , merely unique . Acquiring a repertoire from the Laboratory library was no problem to one trained to perfect recall . She found herself able to sing any role and any song which struck her fancy . It would not have occurred to her that it was curious for a female to sing bass , baritone , tenor , alto , mezzo , soprano and coloratura as she pleased . It was , to Helva , only a matter of the correct reproduction and diaphragmic control required by the music attempted . If the authorities remarked on her curious avocation , they did so among themselves . Shell people were encouraged to develop a hobby so long as they maintained proficiency in their technical work . On the anniversary of her sixteenth year in her shell , Helva was unconditionally graduated and installed in her ship , the Aj . Her permanent titanium shell was recessed behind an even more indestructible barrier in the central shaft of the scout ship . The neural , audio , visual and sensory connections were made and sealed . Her extendibles were diverted , connected or augmented and the final , delicate-beyond-description brain taps were completed while Helva remained anesthetically unaware of the proceedings . When she awoke , she was the ship . Her brain and intelligence controlled every function from navigation to such loading as a scout ship of her class needed . She could take care of herself and her ambulatory half , in any situation already recorded in the annals of Central Worlds and any situation its most fertile minds could imagine . Her first actual flight , for she and her kind had made mock flights on dummy panels since she was eight , showed her complete mastery of the techniques of her profession . She was ready for her great adventures and the arrival of her mobile partner . There were nine qualified scouts sitting around collecting base pay the day Helva was commissioned . There were several missions which demanded instant attention but Helva had been of interest to several department heads in Central for some time and each man was determined to have her assigned to his section . Consequently no one had remembered to introduce Helva to the prospective partners . The ship always chose its own partner . Had there been another `` brain '' ship at the Base at the moment , Helva would have been guided to make the first move . As it was , while Central wrangled among itself , Robert Tanner sneaked out of the pilots' barracks , out to the field and over to Helva's slim metal hull . `` Hello , anyone at home '' ? ? Tanner wisecracked . `` Of course '' , replied Helva logically , activating her outside scanners . `` Are you my partner '' ? ? She asked hopefully , as she recognized the Scout Service uniform . `` All you have to do is ask '' , he retorted hopefully . `` No one has come . I thought perhaps there were no partners available and I've had no directives from Central '' . Even to herself Helva sounded a little self-pitying but the truth was she was lonely , sitting on the darkened field . Always she had had the company of other shells and more recently , technicians by the score . The sudden solitude had lost its momentary charm and become oppressive . `` No directives from Central is scarcely a cause for regret , but there happen to be eight other guys biting their fingernails to the quick just waiting for an invitation to board you , you beautiful thing '' . It would have killed you in the cabin . Do you have anything for me '' ? ? Mercer stammered , not knowing what B'dikkat meant , and the two-nosed man answered for him , `` I think he has a nice baby head , but it isn't big enough for you to take yet '' . Mercer never noticed the needle touch his arm . B'dikkat had turned to the next knot of people when the super-condamine hit Mercer . He tried to run after B'dikkat , to hug the lead spacesuit , to tell B'dikkat that he loved him . He stumbled and fell , but it did not hurt . The many-bodied girl lay near him . Mercer spoke to her . `` Isn't it wonderful ? ? You're beautiful , beautiful , beautiful . I'm so happy to be here '' . The woman covered with growing hands came and sat beside them . She radiated warmth and good fellowship . Mercer thought that she looked very distinguished and charming . He struggled out of his clothes . It was foolish and snobbish to wear clothing when none of these nice people did . The two women babbled and crooned at him . With one corner of his mind he knew that they were saying nothing , just expressing the euphoria of a drug so powerful that the known universe had forbidden it . With most of his mind he was happy . He wondered how anyone could have the good luck to visit a planet as nice as this . He tried to tell the Lady Da , but the words weren't quite straight . A painful stab hit him in the abdomen . The drug went after the pain and swallowed it . It was like the cap in the hospital , only a thousand times better . The pain was gone , though it had been crippling the first time . He forced himself to be deliberate . He rammed his mind into focus and said to the two ladies who lay pinkly nude beside him in the desert , `` That was a good bite . Maybe I will grow another head . That would make B'dikkat happy '' ! ! The Lady Da forced the foremost of her bodies in an upright position . Said she , `` I'm strong , too . I can talk . Remember , man , remember . People never live forever . We can die , too , we can die like real people . I do so believe in death '' ! ! Mercer smiled at her through his happiness . `` Of course you can . But isn't this nice '' With this he felt his lips thicken and his mind go slack . He was wide awake , but he did not feel like doing anything . In that beautiful place , among all those companionable and attractive people , he sat and smiled . B'dikkat was sterilizing his knives . Mercer wondered how long the super-condamine had lasted him . He endured the ministrations of the dromozoa without screams or movement . The agonies of nerves and itching of skin were phenomena which happened somewhere near him , but meant nothing . He watched his own body with remote , casual interest . The Lady Da and the hand-covered woman stayed near him . After a long time the half-man dragged himself over to the group with his powerful arms . Having arrived he blinked sleepily and friendlily at them , and lapsed back into the restful stupor from which he had emerged . Mercer saw the sun rise on occasion , closed his eyes briefly , and opened them to see stars shining . Time had no meaning . The dromozoa fed him in their mysterious way ; ; the drug canceled out his needs for cycles of the body . At last he noticed a return of the inwardness of pain . The pains themselves had not changed ; ; he had . He knew all the events which could take place on Shayol . He remembered them well from his happy period . Formerly he had noticed them -- now he felt them . He tried to ask the Lady Da how long they had had the drug , and how much longer they would have to wait before they had it again . She smiled at him with benign , remote happiness ; ; apparently her many torsos , stretched out along the ground , had a greater capacity for retaining the drug than did his body . She meant him well , but was in no condition for articulate speech . The half-man lay on the ground , arteries pulsating prettily behind the half-transparent film which protected his abdominal cavity . Mercer squeezed the man's shoulder . The half-man woke , recognized Mercer and gave him a healthily sleepy grin . `` ' A good morrow to you , my boy . That's out of a play . Did you ever see a play '' ? ? `` You mean a game with cards '' ? ? `` No '' , said the half-man , `` a sort of eye-machine with real people doing the figures '' . `` I never saw that '' , said Mercer , `` but I '' -- `` But you want to ask me when B'dikkat is going to come back with the needle '' . `` Yes '' , said Mercer , a little ashamed of his obviousness . `` Soon '' , said the half-man . That's why I think of plays . We all know what is going to happen . We all know when it is going to happen . We all know what the dummies will do '' -- he gestured at the hummocks in which the decorticated men were cradled -- `` and we all know what the new people will ask . But we never know how long a scene is going to take '' . `` What's a ' scene ' '' ? ? Asked Mercer . `` Is that the name for the needle '' ? ? The half-man laughed with something close to real humor . `` No , no , no . You've got the lovelies on the brain . A scene is just a part of a play . I mean we know the order in which things happen , but we have no clocks and nobody cares enough to count days or to make calendars and there's not much climate here , so none of us know how long anything takes . The pain seems short and the pleasure seems long . I'm inclined to think that they are about two Earth-weeks each '' . Mercer did not know what an `` Earth-week '' was , since he had not been a well-read man before his conviction , but he got nothing more from the half-man at that time . The half-man received a dromozootic implant , turned red in the face , shouted senselessly at Mercer , `` Take it out , you fool ! ! Take it out of me '' ! ! When Mercer looked on helplessly , the half-man twisted over on his side , his pink dusty back turned to Mercer , and wept hoarsely and quietly to himself . Mercer himself could not tell how long it was before B'dikkat came back . It might have been several days . It might have been several months . Once again B'dikkat moved among them like a father ; ; once again they clustered like children . This time B'dikkat smiled pleasantly at the little head which had grown out of Mercer's thigh -- a sleeping child's head , covered with light hair on top and with dainty eyebrows over the resting eyes . Mercer got the blissful needle . When B'dikkat cut the head from Mercer's thigh , he felt the knife grinding against the cartilage which held the head to his own body . He saw the child-face grimace as the head was cut ; ; he felt the far , cool flash of unimportant pain , as B'dikkat dabbed the wound with a corrosive antiseptic which stopped all bleeding immediately . The next time it was two legs growing from his chest . Then there had been another head beside his own . Or was that after the torso and legs , waist to toe-tips , of the little girl which had grown from his side ? ? He forgot the order . He did not count time . Lady Da smiled at him often , but there was no love in this place . She had lost the extra torsos . In between teratologies , she was a pretty and shapely woman ; ; but the nicest thing about their relationship was her whisper to him , repeated some thousands of time , repeated with smiles and hope , `` People never live forever '' . She found this immensely comforting , even though Mercer did not make much sense out of it . Thus events occurred , and victims changed in appearance , and new ones arrived . Sometimes B'dikkat took the new ones , resting in the everlasting sleep of their burned-out brains , in a ground-truck to be added to other herds . The bodies in the truck threshed and bawled without human speech when the dromozoa struck them . Finally , Mercer did manage to follow B'dikkat to the door of the cabin . He had to fight the bliss of super-condamine to do it . Only the memory of previous hurt , bewilderment and perplexity made him sure that if he did not ask B'dikkat when he , Mercer , was happy , the answer would no longer be available when he needed it . Fighting pleasure itself , he begged B'dikkat to check the records and to tell him how long he had been there . B'dikkat grudgingly agreed , but he did not come out of the doorway . He spoke through the public address box built into the cabin , and his gigantic voice roared out over the empty plain , so that the pink herd of talking people stirred gently in their happiness and wondered what their friend B'dikkat might be wanting to tell them . When he said it , they thought it exceedingly profound , though none of them understood it , since it was simply the amount of time that Mercer had been on Shayol : `` Standard years -- eighty-four years , seven months , three days , two hours , eleven and one half minutes . Good luck , fellow '' . Mercer turned away . The secret little corner of his mind , which stayed sane through happiness and pain , made him wonder about B'dikkat . What persuaded the cow-man to remain on Shayol ? ? What kept him happy without super-condamine ? ? Was B'dikkat a crazy slave to his own duty or was he a man who had hopes of going back to his own planet some day , surrounded by a family of little cow-people resembling himself ? ? Mercer , despite his happiness , wept a little at the strange fate of B'dikkat . His own fate he accepted . He remembered the last time he had eaten -- actual eggs from an actual pan . The dromozoa kept him alive , but he did not know how they did it . He staggered back to the group . The Lady Da , naked in the dusty plain , waved a hospitable hand and showed that there was a place for him to sit beside her . There were unclaimed square miles of seating space around them , but he appreciated the kindliness of her gesture none the less . 4 , The years , if they were years , went by . The land of Shayol did not change . Sometimes the bubbling sound of geysers came faintly across the plain to the herd of men ; ; those who could talk declared it to be the breathing of Captain Alvarez . There was night and day , but no setting of crops , no change of season , no generations of men . Time stood still for these people , and their load of pleasure was so commingled with the shocks and pains of the dromozoa that the words of the Lady Da took on very remote meaning . `` People never live forever '' . Her statement was a hope , not a truth in which they could believe . They did not have the wit to follow the stars in their courses , to exchange names with each other , to harvest the experience of each for the wisdom of all . There was no dream of escape for these people . Though they saw the old-style chemical rockets lift up from the field beyond B'dikkat's cabin , they did not make plans to hide among the frozen crop of transmuted flesh . Far long ago , some other prisoner than one of these had tried to write a letter . His handwriting was on a rock . Mercer read it , and so had a few of the others , but they could not tell which man had done it . Nor did they care . The letter , scraped on stone , had been a message home . They could still read the opening : `` Once , I was like you , stepping out of my window at the end of day , and letting the winds blow me gently toward the place I lived in . Once , like you , I had one head , two hands , ten fingers on my hands . The front part of my head was called a face , and I could talk with it . Now I can only write , and that only when I get out of pain . Dan Morgan told himself he would forget Ann Turner . He was well rid of her . He certainly didn't want a wife who was fickle as Ann . If he had married her , he'd have been asking for trouble . But all of this was rationalization . Sometimes he woke up in the middle of the night thinking of Ann , and then could not get back to sleep . His plans and dreams had revolved around her so much and for so long that now he felt as if he had nothing . The easiest thing would be to sell out to Al Budd and leave the country , but there was a stubborn streak in him that wouldn't allow it . The best antidote for the bitterness and disappointment that poisoned him was hard work . He found that if he was tired enough at night , he went to sleep simply because he was too exhausted to stay awake . Each day he found himself thinking less often of Ann ; ; each day the hurt was a little duller , a little less poignant . He had plenty of work to do . Because the summer was unusually dry and hot , the spring produced a smaller stream than in ordinary years . The grass in the meadows came fast , now that the warm weather was here . He could not afford to lose a drop of the precious water , so he spent most of his waking hours along the ditches in his meadows . He had no idea how much time Budd would give him . In any case , he had no intention of being caught asleep , so he carried his revolver in its holster on his hip and he took his Winchester with him and leaned it against the fence . He stopped every few minutes and leaned on his shovel as he studied the horizon , but nothing happened , each day dragging out with monotonous calm . When , in late afternoon on the last day in June , he saw two people top the ridge to the south and walk toward the house , he quit work immediately and strode to his rifle . It could be some kind of trick Budd had thought up . No one walked in this country , least of all Ed Dow or Dutch Renfro or any of the rest of the Bar B crew . Morgan watched the two figures for a time , puzzled . When they were closer and he saw that one was a woman , he was more puzzled than ever . He cleaned his shovel , left it against the fence , picked up his Winchester , and started downstream . His visitors had crawled through the south fence and were crossing the meadow , angling toward the house . Now he saw that both the man and woman were moving slowly and irregularly , staggering , as if they found it a struggle to remain on their feet . Reaching the house ahead of them , he waited with his Winchester in his hands . They crawled through the north fence and came on toward him , and now he saw that both were young , not more than nineteen or twenty . They were dirty , their clothes were torn , and the girl was so exhausted that she fell when she was still twenty feet from the front door . She lay there , making no effort to get back on her feet . The boy came on to the porch and sat down , his gaze on Morgan as if half expecting him to shoot and not really caring . Morgan hesitated , thinking that if this was a trick , it was a good one . He didn't think it was possible for this couple to be pretending . The boy licked his dry lips . He asked , `` Could we have a drink '' ? ? Morgan jerked his head toward the front door . `` In the kitchen '' , he said . Leaning his Winchester against the front of the house , he walked to the girl . `` Get up . There's water in the house '' . She didn't move or say anything . Her eyes were glazed as if she didn't hear or even see him . She had reached a point at which she didn't even care how she looked . Her face was very thin , and burned by the sun until much of the skin was dead and peeling , the new skin under it red and angry . Her blond hair was frowzy , her dress torn in several places , and her shoes were so completely worn out that they were practically no protection . It must have hurt her even to walk , for the sole was completely off her left foot and Morgan saw that it was bruised and bleeding . He picked her up , sliding one hand under her shoulders , the other under her knees , and carried her into the house . She was amazingly light , and so relaxed in his arms that he wasn't even sure she was conscious . Any lingering suspicion that this was a trick Al Budd had thought up was dispelled . No girl would go this far to fool a man so she could kill him . Besides , she had a sweet face that attracted him . He put her down on the couch , and going into the kitchen , saw that the boy had dropped into a chair beside the table . They looked a good deal alike , Morgan thought . Both had blonde hair and blue eyes , and there was even a faint similarity of features . Morgan filled the dipper from the water bucket on the shelf , went back into the front room , lifted the girl's head , and held the edge of the dipper to her mouth . She drank greedily , and murmured , `` Thank you '' , as he lowered her head . He stood looking down at her for a moment , wondering what could have reduced her to this condition . He had seen a few nester wagons go through the country , the families almost starving to death , but he had never seen any of them on foot and as bad off as these two . The girl dropped off to sleep . Morgan returned to the kitchen , built a fire , and carried in several buckets of water from the spring which he poured into the copper boiler that he had placed on the stove . He brought his Winchester in from the front of the house , then faced the boy . `` Who are you and what happened to you '' ? ? He asked . `` I'm Billy Jones '' , the boy answered . `` That's my wife Sharon . We ran out of money and we haven't eaten for two days '' . `` What are you doing here '' ? ? `` Are we in Wyoming '' ? ? Morgan nodded . `` About five miles north of the line '' . Jones sighed as if relieved . `` We've been looking for work , but all the ranchers have turned us down '' . `` You mean you dragged your wife all over hell's half-acre looking for work '' ? ? Morgan demanded . `` The town of Buckhorn's only about six miles from here . Why didn't you go there '' ? ? `` We didn't want town work '' , Jones said . `` This is a mighty empty country '' , Morgan said . `` There's only one more ranch three miles north of here . You'd have starved to death if you'd missed both places '' . `` Then we're lucky we got here . Could you give us a job , Mr. '' `` Morgan . Dan Morgan '' . He was silent a moment , thinking he could use a man this time of year , and if the girl could cook , it would give him more time in the meadows , but he knew nothing about the couple . They might kill him in his sleep , thinking there was money in the house . He dismissed the possibility at once . The girl's thin face haunted him . It wasn't the face of a killer . He wasn't so sure about the boy . He hadn't shaved for several weeks , his sparse beard giving his face a pathetic , woebegone expression . There was more to this than Jones had told him . They were running from something . He'd be an idiot to let them stay he thought , but he couldn't send them on , either . `` I could use some help '' , Morgan said finally , `` but I can't afford to pay you anything . I guess you'd better go on in the morning '' . `` We'll work for our keep '' , the boy said eagerly . `` I've been mucking in a mine in the San Juan , but I used to work on a ranch . Sharon , she's cooked in a restaurant . We'll work hard , Mr. Morgan '' . `` I'll see '' , Morgan said . `` Right now you need a meal and a bath . Your wife's in terrible shape '' . `` I know '' , Jones said dejectedly . Morgan filled the fire box with wood again , then started supper and set the table . When the meal was ready , he told Jones to wash up , and going into the front room , woke the girl . He said , `` I've got some supper ready '' . She rubbed her eyes and stretched , then sat up , her hands going to her hair . `` I'm a mess '' , she said , and suddenly she was alarmed . `` Who are you ? ? How did we get here '' ? ? `` I'm Dan Morgan . This is the Rafter Aj . You fell down in front of the house , and I carried you in . I gave you a drink and then you went to sleep '' . `` Oh '' . She stared at him , her eyes wide as she thought about what he had said ; ; then she murmured : `` You're very kind , Mr. Morgan . Do you take in all the strays who come by '' ? ? `` I don't have many strays coming to my front door '' , he said . `` Think you can walk to the table '' ? ? `` Of course '' . She got to her feet , staggered , and almost fell . He caught her by an arm and helped her into the kitchen . She sat down at the table , shaking her head . `` I'm sorry , Mr. Morgan . I'm usually a very strong woman , but I'm awfully tired '' . `` And hungry '' , he said . `` Start in . It's not much of a meal , but it's what I eat '' . `` Not much of a meal '' ? ? The girl cried . `` Mr. Morgan , it's the best-looking food I ever saw '' . He told himself he had never seen two people eat so much . When they were finally satisfied , Jones said , `` I think he's going to give us work '' . The grateful way she looked at Morgan made him ashamed of himself . When he saw the expression in her eyes , he knew he couldn't send them on . She said , `` I guess the Lord looks out for fools , drunkards , and innocents '' . Morgan laughed . `` Which are you '' ? ? `` We're not drunkards '' , she said . `` That's all I'm sure of '' . She helped him with the dishes , then he brought more water in from the spring before it got dark . He carried the tub from the back of the house where it hung from a nail in the wall . He said : `` You'll feel a lot better after you have a bath . Your feet are in bad shape , Mrs. Jones . You'll have to go to town to see the doc '' . `` No , she'll be all right '' , Jones said quickly . `` I mean , we don't have any way to get there and we can't expect you to quit work just to take us to town '' . `` We'll see '' , Morgan said . `` Could you find me a needle and thread '' ? ? The girl asked . `` My dress needs some work on it '' . He nodded and , going into the bedroom , brought a needle , thread , and scissors . He said : `` I'm going to bed '' . He nodded at the door in front of him . `` That's my spare bedroom . The bed isn't made , but you'll find plenty of blankets there '' . `` You're awfully kind '' , the girl said . `` We'll pay you back if you'll let us . Some way '' . `` It's all right '' , he said . `` I get up early . You'd better sleep '' . Jones followed him into the front room , closing the door behind him . He said : `` If it's all right with you , Mr. Morgan , I'll sleep out here on the couch . We haven't slept together since we started . I just can't take any chances on getting her pregnant , and if we were sleeping together '' He stopped , embarrassed , and Morgan said , `` I understand that , but I don't savvy why you'd go off and leave your jobs in the first place '' . `` We got fired '' , Jones said . `` We had to do something '' . They were a pair of lost , whipped kids , Morgan thought as he went to bed . Gavin paused wearily . `` You can't stay here with me . It's late and you said they'd be here by dawn '' . `` You can't make me go '' . Gavin sank down again into his chair and began to rock . He was thinking of Rittenhouse and how he had left him there , to rock to death on the porch of the Splendide . It was the only thing in his life for which he felt guilt . Beneath his black shirt his frail shoulders shook and croaks of pain broke from his throat , the stored pain shattering free in slow gasps , terrible to see . Clayton tried to call back the face of the man he had known . Against that other man he could rally his anger ; ; against this bent man in the chair he was powerless . Gavin's lips moved so that Clayton had to stoop to catch the words . `` Do you remember Big Charlie '' ? ? He whispered . `` He stuck with me all these years . Just a half-breed 'pache , never said much , never meant anythin to me , but he stuck with me . He got into a fight with Tom English , your brother's son . It was a fair fight , the boy provoked it -- Big Charlie told me so . I believed him . They killed Big Charlie , dumped his body in my rose garden two nights ago . My men , they all left me . Just cleared out . I didn't understand why , Clay . They just all cleared out . I treated them fair '' He wiped his lips with a sleeve , then stared at Clayton in a childish kind of wonder . `` Do you mean '' -- he asked almost shyly -- `` you want me to go with you , wherever you're goin '' ? ? `` Yes '' . `` You don't hate me any more '' ? ? Clayton choked , shook his head , murmuring , `` No '' . `` Come here '' . The old man beckoned with one finger and Clayton went forward to him . Gavin slipped his arms around his chest and hugged him fiercely . `` All my life '' , he said , `` I tried . I tried . I saw you driftin away -- but I tried . And you wanted no part of me when I had so much to give . Now there's nothin left of me . Laurel is gone , my men are gone , Ed is dead -- and you come to me , to help me . Oh ! ! God in Heaven , I can't refuse you now . That would mock me too much ! ! Can't let you go way from me again '' He closed his eyes , ashamed of his tears . `` I'll go , Clay '' . Clayton freed himself from the embrace and stepped back . The eyes followed him fearfully . `` The horses . There isn't much time . I'll saddle the horses and bring them round . You get ready '' He burst from the hot confinement of the room into the cold night air . Gavin's stallion was in the barn and he tightened the cinches over the saddle blanket , working by touch in the darkness , comforting the animal with easy words . When he had finished he led him and the mare to the porch . The stallion had smelled the mare coming into heat and began to paw the turf , shaking his head . Clayton looped the reins in a knot over the veranda post and patted the warm flesh of his neck . The mare had backed away . `` You take it easy , boy '' , Clayton whispered . `` She doesn't want you now . You take it easy , your time will come '' . Gavin stood on the porch , a thin figure . He had taken a carbine down from the wall and it trailed from his hand , the stock bumping on the wood floor . Clayton called to him and he came slowly down the steps . `` Clay '' , he said , `` where are we goin '' ? ? `` To a ranch in the valley . There's someone there I have to see . We may take her with us -- to California . I don't know yet , it's crazy ; ; I have to think about it . But California is where we're goin '' . `` California '' . Gavin began to nod . `` That's a new land . A man could make a mark there . Two men , together like us , we could do somethin fine out there , maybe find a place where no one's ever been . Start out fresh , the two of us , like nothin had ever happened '' . `` Yes , like a father and son '' . `` I made you what you are '' , Gavin whispered . `` I made you so you could stand up . I made you a man '' . `` Yes , Gavin , you did '' . He approached the horse and laid a hand on the stallion's quivering neck . `` Help me up , Clay . Help me up , I feel kind of stiff '' . Clayton lifted him gently into the saddle , like a child . `` I hate to leave my garden '' , Gavin said . `` They'll trample it down . I loved my garden '' . `` It will grow again -- in California '' . `` I loved this valley '' , he whispered huskily . `` Lived alone here for three years , before any man came . Lived alone by the river . It was nice then , so peaceful and quiet . There was no one but me . I don't want to leave it '' . Clayton swung into the saddle and whacked the stallion's rump . The two horses broke from the yard , from the circle of light cast by the lamp still burning in the house , into the darkness . Thirty-five they rode at a measured pace through the valley . Dawn would come soon and the night was at its coldest . The moon had sunk below the black crest of the mountains and the land , seen through eyes that had grown accustomed to the absence of light , looked primeval , as if no man had ever trespassed before . It looked as Gavin had first seen it years ago , on those nights when he slept alone by his campfire and waked suddenly to the hoot of an owl or the rustle of a blade of grass in the moon's wind -- a savage land , untenanted and brooding , too strong to be broken by the will of men . Gavin sighed bitterly . In that inert landscape the caravan of his desires passed before his mind . He saw them ambushed , strewn in the postures of the broken and the dying . In vain his mind groped to reassemble the bones of the relationships he had sought so desperately , but they would not come to life . The silence oppressed him , made him bend low over the horse's neck as if to hide from a wind that had begun to blow far away and was twisting slowly through the darkness in its slow search . They passed ranches that were framed dark gray against the black hills . Then at last the darkness began to dissolve . A bold line of violet broke loose from the high ridge of the mountains , followed by feathers of red that swept the last stars from the sky . The wan light spread over the ground and the valley revealed in the first glimmer the contours of trees and fences and palely shadowed gullies . They had been seen as soon as they left the ranch , picked out of the darkness by the weary though watchful eyes of two men posted a few hundred yards away in the windless shelter of the trees . The two men whipped their horses into town and flung themselves up the steps of the saloon , crying their intelligence . The men in Pettigrew's were tired from a night's drinking , their faces red and baggy . But the liquor had flushed their courage . They greeted the news angrily , as though they had been cheated of purpose . Lester heard their muttering , saw their eyes reveal their desire . He worked his tongue round and round in the hollow of his cheek and his voice came out of his throat , dry and cracked . `` He's leavin . That's what you wanted , isn't it ? ? Clayton is with him , takin him out of the valley . You can't '' -- `` Keep out of this '' , Purvis snarled . `` He's not your brother , he's Gavin's son . You see , he lied to us when he said he was leavin alone '' . Joe Purvis was thinking back many years . First he thought of the time he had ridden to Gavin and told him how his cattle were being rustled at the far end of the valley . He remembered Gavin's smirk , his own cringing feeling , his impotence . Then he thought of a time when Clayton's horse had fallen lame in the Gap . His wife had said to him : `` Nellie is in love with Clayton Roy . He wouldn't even dance with her at Gavin's party . He treats her like she was dirt . And you stand by like a fool and let him do it '' He remembered Clayton's mocking smile in the saloon when he had asked him what he would do if they brought their cattle to water . It was the night Clayton had tricked them in the poker game . `` You're Gavin's son '' , Joe Purvis had said . He turned to Lester . `` You brought him back to this valley thinkin he would help you find your boy . He meant to help Gavin all the time . He made a fool of you , Lester '' . He swung round to the other men -- `` We can catch him easy ! ! There are plenty of fresh horses halfway at my place . If we let them go , they won't stay away , they'll find men to ride with them and they'll be back . There's only one way they can get out now and that's through the Gap -- if we ride hard we can take them '' . Lester's hand fluttered to Cabot's shoulder . The boy jerked away . `` He killed Tom -- do you understand that '' ? ? Cabot turned back to the men and he was drunk with the thing they would do , wild to break from the cloying warmth of the saloon into the cold of the ebbing night . He fled through the door and down the steps , running , and the men grunted and followed , pushing Lester to one side where he backed against the wall with the sleeve of his jacket raised before his eyes to shut out the light . Purvis and Silas Pettigrew were the last to leave . They mounted up and rode slowly behind the others at a safe distance . Thirty-six in the cold dawn the mist swirled low to the ground , then rose with a gust of sudden wind to leave the valley clear . The clouds parted and hard gashes of sunlight swooped down to stain the earth with streaks of white and gold light so that the shadows of the running horses flowed like dark streams over the dazzling snow . When they turned in the saddle they could see the men behind them , strung out on the prairie in a flat black line . The wind of their running was cold and wild , the horses were lathered and their manes streamed like stiff black pennants in the wind . The mare began to tire and Clayton felt the spray of snow from the hoofs of Gavin's stallion . He looked over his shoulder at the thin dotting of pursuers . They neither gained nor fell back . He rode low on the mare's neck . Ahead of him Gavin turned slightly off the trail and pointed for the Gap , no more than a mile away . Gavin's face was bloodless with excitement . He did not look back ; ; he could feel more than hear the staccato beat of hoofs that fanned out across the prairie to the north . He knew who was riding after him -- the men he had known all his life , the men who had worked for him , sworn their loyalty to him . Now they were riding to kill him . And he was fleeing , running -- fleeing his death and his life at the same time . The land over which he sped was the land he had created and lived in : his valley . With every leaping stride of the horse beneath him he crossed one more patch of earth that had been his , that he would never see again . The Gap looming before him -- the place where had confronted Jack English on that day so many years ago -- was his exit from all that had meaning to him . California is too far , he thought . He would never reach California . He was too old -- when he passed up and through the corridor of pines that lined the trail he could see ahead , he was passing from life . The sentry was not dead . He was , in fact , showing signs of reviving . He had been carrying an Enfield rifle and a holstered navy cap-and-ball pistol . A bayonet hung in a belt scabbard . He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic and hat . Mike stripped these from him and donned them . He and Dean tied and gagged the man , using his belt and shirt for the purpose . They dragged him inside the building . Fiske joined them , unsteady on his feet . Julia , seeing the bandage , rushed to him . `` You are hurt '' ! ! She breathed . `` I never felt better in my life '' , Fiske blustered . He turned to Susan and kissed her on the cheek . `` Thank you , My dear '' , he said . `` You are very brave '' . Mike silenced them . `` We'll talk later . First , we've got to get out of here '' . `` We'll grab horses '' , Dean said . `` The main bunch is outside , but there are some over there inside the wall '' . Mike debated it , trying to decide whether Fiske was strong enough to ride . But it at least offered him a chance for living . He had none here . And , for the sake of Julia and Susan , it had to be tried . The guerrilla bivouac remained silent . Light showed in the orderly room across the parade ground . Someone evidently was on duty there . No doubt there would be men guarding the horses . About a dozen animals were held inside the stockade , as best Mike could make out in the moonlight . Evidently this was a precaution so that mounts would be available in an emergency . He handed the guard's rifle to Fiske . `` Dean and myself will try to cut out horses to ride '' , he said . `` We'll stampede the rest . You stay with the ladies . All of you be ready to ride hell for leather '' . He added , `` If this doesn't work out , the three of you barricade yourself in the house and talk terms with them '' . He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol . Susan halted Dean and kissed him . She clung to him , talking to him , and dabbing at her eyes . Mike turned away . He was thinking that the way she had responded to his own kiss hadn't meant what he had believed it had . He felt unutterably weary . Dean turned from Susan and took Julia Fortune in his arms . He kissed her also , and with deep tenderness . She too began to weep . He released her and joined Mike . `` All right '' , he said . Mike only said , `` Later '' . `` Be careful , McLish '' ! ! Susan said fiercely . `` The way you were careful '' ? ? He snorted . `` Running around in the moonlight almost naked and slugging a man with a rock '' ? ? He kept going . He wanted no more sentimental scenes with her . He might say or do something foolish . Something all of them would regret . He might tell her how sorry a spectacle she was making of herself , pretending to be blind to the way Julia Fortune had taken Dean's affections from her . And using him , Mike McLish , as a sop to her pride . He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol . `` Stay well back of me '' , he said . `` I'm going to walk up to the horses , bold as brass , pretending I'm one of the guerrillas . There's bound to be someone on guard , but the hat might fool them long enough for me to get close '' . Holding the pistol concealed , he walked to the rear wall of the stockade . It was pierced by a wagon gate built of two wings . One wing stood open . Mike passed through it and moved toward the dark mass of horses . They were tethered , army style , on stable lines . A voice spoke near-at-hand . `` Who's that '' ? ? Just me '' , Mike said . `` Is that you , Bill '' ? ? He located his man . The guard stood in the shadow of the stockade wall just out of reach of the moonlight . Mike kept walking and got within arm's reach before the man became suspicious and straightened from his lax slouch . Mike struck with the muzzle of the pistol . But the luck that had been running their way left him . The guard instinctively parried the blow with his rifle . He tried to veer the rifle around to fire into Mike's body . Mike , off balance , managed to bat the muzzle away a moment before it exploded . The bullet went wide . Mike swung the pistol in a savage backlash . This time it connected solidly on the man's temple , felling him . The explosion of the rifle had crashed against the walls of the stockade and the deep echoes were still rolling in the hills . The startled horses began rearing on their tethers . Dean came rushing up . `` Are you hit '' ? ? He demanded . `` No , but the fat's in the fire '' ! ! Mike said . `` There's no chance now of all of us getting away . You'll have to try it alone '' . The sentry's saddled horse stood picketed nearby , having been kept handy in case of need . Mike took the bayonet from Dean's hand and slashed the picket line . `` Up you go '' ! ! He said . `` Ride '' ! ! Dean resisted Mike's attempt to push him toward the horse . `` Why not you '' ? ? He protested . `` Dammit '' ! ! Mike said frantically . `` You're lighter than me . It's our only chance now . Try to find these Feds . The rest of us can fort up in the house and hang on until you get back . You're the one that's taking the big chance '' . Dean still hesitated , but Mike lifted him almost bodily into the saddle and thrust the reins in his hand . `` No telling how good this horse is '' , Mike panted . `` Favor him and save something in case you hit trouble . Watch out for Apaches when it comes daylight . Take the pistol . You might need it . We'll still have the rifle , and I might be able to round up some more . I'll stampede the rest of these horses so they can't chase you '' . Dean leaned from the saddle and gave him a mighty whack on the back . `` McLish '' , he said as he kicked the horse into motion , `` I'd be a mighty sad man if we never met again '' . Then he was on his way at a gallop . Mike ran down the line , slashing picket ropes with the bayonet . He lifted a screeching war whoop . That touched off a total stampede . He darted inside the stockade and freed the horses there . These poured through the gate and joined the flight . The animals thundered away into the moonlight , heading for the ridges . The guerrillas were swarming from their bivouac at the west end of the enclosure . `` Apaches '' ! ! Mike yelled . `` They're stealin' the stock '' ! ! He scuttled in shadow along the east wall of the stockade and then followed the south wall until he was at the rear of the two frame buildings . He crouched there . His shout had been taken up and repeated . The guerrillas were running across the parade ground and through the rear gate in the wake of the departing horses . All were carrying guns they had seized up , but they were half-clad or hardly clad at all . Durkin and Calhoun came running from the post . They had pistols in their hands . They bawled questions that were not answered in the uproar . They followed the others toward the east gate . Beyond the stockade rifles began to explode as some of the guerrillas fired at shadows that they imagined were Apaches . Mike made a dash to the rear of the frame buildings . He crawled beneath the two supply wagons which stood between the buildings and peered around a corner . The area was deserted . A man was standing in the open door of the lighted orderly room a few yards to Mike's left , but he , too , suddenly made up his mind and went racing to join the confused activity at the east end of the stockade . Mike crawled to the door and peered in . The orderly room seemed to be deserted . A lantern hung from a peg , giving light . Ducking inside , he found that three rifles were stacked in a corner . A brace of pistols , holstered on belts , hung from a peg , along with ammunition pouches . An ammunition case stood open , containing canisters which contained powder cartridges . Mike seized a blanket from a pallet in a corner , spread it on the floor and used it to form a bag in which he placed his booty . Shouldering the load he peered from the door . His looting of the orderly room had taken only a minute or two and the vicinity was still clear of guerrillas . He looked at the looming hoods of the supply wagons , struck by a new inspiration . He set his bundle down . Snatching the lantern from its peg , he shattered its globe with a blow against a post . He picked up the powder canister and ran out . Bursting paper cartridges , he scattered powder beneath the nearest wagon and dumped the contents of the canister upon it . He shouldered the blanket again , backed off , and tossed the lantern with its open wick beneath the wagon . He turned and raced across the parade ground toward the rock house . Powder flame gushed beneath the wagon . The stockade was brilliantly lighted and the guerrillas sighted him . They realized the truth . Bullets began to snap past him . One struck the muzzle of one of the rifles that projected from the shoulder pack . Its force spun him around , but he recovered and got into stride again . A bullet tore the earth from beneath his foot when he was a stride or two from safety . Another struck him heavily in the thigh and he went down . Guerrillas were racing toward him . Susan and Julia came from the door and dragged him with them . The three of them floundered through the door into the interior and fell in a heap . Susan bounced to her feet and slammed the door . She crouched aside as bullets beat at the portal , chewing into the planks . Some tore entirely through the whipsawed post oak . The iron hinges held , but the planks were in danger of being torn from the crossbars . Mike rolled to Susan , grasped her around the knees , dragging her off her feet . He hovered over her to shield her , for spent bullets were thudding against the rear walls . He peered from a loophole . Guerrillas were only a dozen yards away , charging the house . Mike snatched a pistol from the heap of scattered booty and fired . He dropped a man with the first bullet . At the same moment Wheeler Fiske fired the rifle Mike had given him and another guerrilla was hit . That halted the rush . The guerrillas scattered for cover . The wagons were burning fiercely . The mudwagon had caught fire also . The blaze was spreading to the frame buildings . The guerrillas realized they faced a new problem . `` Gawdamighty '' ! ! One screeched . `` There goes our grub an' ammunition '' ! ! `` Get a bucket line going '' ! ! Calhoun shouted . `` Hurry ! ! Hurry '' ! ! The guerrillas began a frantic search for pails in which to bring water from the spring . But what few containers they found were inadequate . Many of them , in increasing panic , came running with water in their hats in a ludicrous effort . Both buildings were in flames . The heat drove the guerrillas back . The roof of the command post began to buckle . `` Drag the wagons to the spring '' ! ! Lew Durkin yelled . `` Run 'em right into the spring ! ! Hustle '' ! ! One of the wagons erupted a massive pillar of flame . A sizable supply of powder had been touched off . The wagons and the coach were beyond saving and so were the buildings . The glow of the fire reached through the openings in the windows , giving light enough to examine Mike's wound . The bullet had torn through the flesh just above the knee , inflicting an ugly gash that was forming a pool of blood on the floor . But it had missed the bone and had passed on through . Susan and Julia ripped strips from their clothing and bound the injury . Mike tested the leg and found that he was able to hobble around on it . `` So it wasn't the earthquake that made him return to his village '' ! ! `` No . Now dammit , I don't want to go into any more explanations . Here comes Jason . Keep this to yourself '' . Reverend Jason , looking worried , hurried toward us . `` Anything wrong , cap'n ? ? The men seem to think so '' . `` Dirion found a large war party south of us . They'll probably attack at dawn '' , Montero said . He brushed past the clergyman and walked into the center of the camp . Using his hands as a trumpet he shouted , `` Fort up ! ! Fort up ! ! There's a large war party on their way '' ! ! For a second , engages , cooks , voyageurs appeared struck dumb . Then Little Billy began shouting orders to round up the ponies and fill the water buckets and for the cooks to hurry up with the meal . They all flew into action . `` That was a terrible thing to do '' , I said to Oso . The Aricaras treated us like friends . And here all the time you knew the Sioux would be using our rifles on them ! ! God , what a world you people live in '' . Oso gave me an unruffled look . `` Old Knife's got the largest war party ever seen on the river '' , he said calmly . `` What would you have done in Montero's moccasins ? ? Let Old Knife come up and kill you and your people , or would you steer him on someone else '' ? ? He shook his head . `` Mr. Manuel did that in the war . That's why the British never got the tribes to fight for the King . Mr. Manuel whispered in the ears of the Sioux that the Cheyennes were comin' to raid 'em for their horses . Then he went on to the Cheyennes and told them that the Sioux was goin' to move up . He did that with all the Nations . Hell , they were fightin' each other so hard they had no time for anyone else . The War Department wrote Mr. Manuel a letter and said he was a hero . I saw that letter . He carried it in a little wallet made of fish skin '' . `` But that was war '' , I said . `` There's no war on now '' . `` You're wrong , Matt . In this country there's a war on every time the grass turns green . First it was the Nations against themselves , then it was them against the whites . And it's goin' to go on like this year after year until the white people take over this land '' . I remember being told it would happen so fast people would think it took place overnight . `` That's why this company's important . Once we get over the mountains others will come along . That's why the Trust don't want us to make it . That bastard Chambers ! ! -- Old Knife's not the only chief he'll get to do his dirty work ! ! Before we get through he'll have the Blackfeet hankerin' for our hair and our goods . Well , talkin' ain't goin' to help -- let's fort up '' ! ! As I dug in behind one of the bales we were using as protection , I grudgingly found myself agreeing with Oso's logic , especially when I imagined what would have happened to Missy if Old Knife's large party of screeching warriors had overrun our company . For , unlike the Sioux and the Crows , the Aricaras are not great horsemen , nor are they aggressive like the savage Blackfeet . More of an agricultural nation , they have relied on their warriors only for defense and for survival in the endless wars of the plains . Still , I was disgusted with myself for agreeing with Montero's methods . Surprisingly , he had told the others what he had done . In the brief moment I had to talk to them before I took my post on the ring of defenses , I indicated I was sickened by the methods men employed to live and trade on the river . `` I think Montero did right '' , Amy said firmly . `` Let the savages kill each other . What do we care '' ? ? Reverend Jason was understandably bitter . `` It was a terrible thing to do . Those little children . '' But Oso replied calmly , `` Trouble ain't easy to dodge out in this country , rev'rend '' . 28 . Attack Gray Eyes attacked our camp just as the first pink threads stitched together the hills and the sky . Our camp was in the center of a wide valley . Montero had set up a strong position , using every bale and box we had in addition to barricades of logs and brush . He had ordered the ponies brought inside the fortified circle and had assigned Pierre and a band of picked engages the job of trying to keep them steady under fire . The pony herd was the one flaw in our defense ; ; the Rees undoubtedly would try to cut down as many of the animals as possible . Wildly bucking horses would make the position difficult to defend against charging warriors . The cooks had prepared one of the best meals we'd had in a long time , and on Montero's orders had baked enough bread to last the day . Buckets were filled , the herd fed and watered . The worst part had been the waiting ; ; although we didn't expect the attack before dawn , the long cloudy night , filled with the sounds of the industrious insects , seemed endless . Coyotes and hunting wolves sounded like signaling Indian scouts , the whinny of a restless pony made one's skin crawl . Oso slept unconcernedly , his rifle cradled in his arms ; ; I didn't catch a wink . Every time I closed my eyes , I saw Gray Eyes rushing at me with a knife . It was a relief when they finally came . They poured through the opening in the valley , then spread out in a long line to come at us , brandishing their lances and filling the morning with their spine-chilling scalp cry . `` Oso '' , Montero called `` I'll get Gray Eyes '' . `` That'll be a pleasure to see '' , the big black murmured as he stared down the barrel of his rifle . `` Hold your fire '' , Montero was shouting . `` Wait until my shot . I'll shoot the first man who doesn't '' . I could see them in my sights . They were about a mile off ; ; under me the ground quivered slightly . At first they were only feathers and dark indistinguishable faces and bodies , hunched over their horses' heads . Gradually they emerged as men . Gray Eyes was in the lead . His face was split by a vermilion streak , his eyes were pools of white ; ; jagged red and black medicine symbols covered his chest . He was naked except for a clout . Next to him was a young boy I was sure had sat near me at one of the trading sessions . His mouth was open , his neck corded with the strain of his screams . I found his chest in my sights . It had a red circle . The circle came nearer and nearer . My God , how long is he going to wait , I thought . Montero's rifle cracked . At first I thought he had missed . Gray Eyes remained erect . The feathered lance was still above his head . As he started to slump over , another warrior swung him onto his horse . I squeezed the trigger . At the last second I dropped my sights from the bare chest and bright red circle to the chest of his pony . I saw the pony fall like a stone and the young warrior flew over its head , bouncing like a rubber ball . He started to run but Oso's shot caught him on the wing . He jerked once in the grass and lay still . `` If you're goin' to kill 'em -- ! ! Kill 'em '' ! ! Oso growled . What else he said was lost in the rattle of gunfire on all sides . The Aricaras broke under the devastating fire , wheeled and retreated . `` Lead up ! ! Lead up ! ! They'll be back '' ! ! Montero was shouting . Far up the valley I could see the Rees circling and reorganizing . Out in front of our walls the grass was covered with dead and dying men , war shields , lances , blankets and wounded and dead horses . The morning air was filled with the sweetish odor of new-spilled blood , the acrid stench of frightened horses , and the bitterness of burned powder . A horse screamed as it twisted from side to side in a frenzy . A rifle cracked ; ; the square head fell over . One of the warriors suddenly leaped to his feet and began running across the valley to the trees that lined the small creek . His legs pumped furiously , his long black hair streamed out behind him . There was a ragged volley . He was dead before he hit the ground . `` For Christ's sake , don't waste your powder on one of 'em '' ! ! Montero shouted furiously . `` Wait for the charge ! ! The charge , I tell you '' ! ! The sharp cries at the end of the valley were faint . They grew louder as the Indians charged again . I could see their faces glistening with sweat and bear grease , their mouths open , shouting their spine-chilling cries . `` Gray Eyes is back , , Montero said . The war captain had been badly wounded and was fighting to hold his seat . I could see the blood running down his chest . He was riding between two warriors , who held him erect when he started to slump . I forgot to aim . In my sights I watched him looming bigger and bigger . Montero's shot had caught him high in the chest ; ; there was no doubt he was dying . Again we waited for Montero . This time he delayed so long that some of the engages shouted frantically , but they held their fire . The horses were only several lengths away when he fired . The bullet flung Gray Eyes from his horse . Our rolling volley swept most of the other riders from their mounts . But a few reached our wall . I heard the whir of an ax and a Canadian's face burst apart in a bloody spray . I saw Little Billy rise and fire almost point blank and an Indian's face became shattered flesh and bone . A second leaped from his horse to the top of the bale , firing four arrows in such rapid succession it didn't seem possible they were in flight . Men screamed . Oso reached up , jerked the buck from the bale and snapped his neck . Other Indians were running at the ponies , shrilling and waving blankets . Reverend Jason got one , the Canadians the others . I saw the clergyman kneel for a moment by the twitching body of the man he had shot , then run back to his position . The ponies were almost uncontrollable . The pall of dust they raised made it difficult to see when the Aricaras charged again . This time more of them hurdled the barrier . A small Indian dived at Montero , who caught him with a swift upward stroke of his rifle butt . It sounded like a man kicking a melon . Above me a dark rider was whipping his pony with a quirt in an attempt to hurdle the bales . Although my shot killed his horse , he rolled off the bale on top of me . I could smell woodsmoke , grease , and oil . His eyes were dark , fluid , fearful , and he gave a sigh as my knife went in . Coming over the wall he had seemed like a hideous devil . Now under me I could see him for what he really was , a boy dressed up in streaks of paint . The Aricaras made one last desperate charge . It was pitiful to see the thin ranks of warriors , old and young , wheeling and twisting their ponies frantically from side to side only to be tumbled bleeding from their saddles by the relentless slam , slam of the cruelly efficient Hawkinses . Others , badly wounded , gripped hands in manes , knees in bellies , held on as long as possible and then , weak from ghastly wounds , slipped sideways , slowly , almost thoughtfully , to be broken under the slashing hoofs . Some gracefully soared from the backs of their wounded , screaming mounts to make one last defiant charge before the lead split their hearts or tore their guts . None of them reached our walls again . The few survivors grudgingly turned away . In the distance we could hear the drums and the wail of the death song . She was carrying a quirt , and she started to raise it , then let it fall again and dangle from her wrist . `` I saw your fire '' , she said , speaking slowly , making an effort to control her anger . `` You could burn down this whole mountainside with a fire that size . It wouldn't matter to a fool like you . It would to me '' . `` All right '' , Wilson said quickly . `` The fire's too big . And I appreciate the advice '' . He was losing patience again . An hour before , with the children asleep and nothing but the strange darkness , he would have appreciated company . She had helped him change his mind . `` I'm not advising you '' , she said . `` I'm telling you . That fire's too big . Let it burn down . And make sure it's out when you leave in the morning '' . He was taken aback . It took him a long time to compose himself . `` There's some mistake '' , he said finally . `` You're right about the fire . It's bigger than it has to be , though I don't see where it's doing any harm . But you're wrong about the rest of it . I'm not leaving in the morning . Why should I ? ? I own the place '' . She showed her surprise by tightening the reins and moving the gelding around so that she could get a better look at his face . It didn't seem to tell her anything . She glanced around the clearing , taking in the wagon and the load of supplies and trappings scattered over the ground , the two kids , the whiteface bull that was chewing its cud just within the far reaches of the firelight . She studied it for a long time . Then she turned back to Wilson and smiled , and he wasn't quite sure what she meant by it . `` You own this place '' ? ? She said , and her tone had softened until it was almost friendly . `` You bought it '' ? ? `` From a man in St. Louis '' , Wilson said . `` Jake Carwood . Maybe you know him '' . The girl laughed . `` I know him . I ought to . My father ran him off here six years ago '' . Wilson didn't say anything . He stood watching the girl , wondering what was coming next . She had picked up the quirt and was twirling it around her wrist and smiling at him . `` Carwood didn't tell you that '' , she said . `` No '' , Wilson said . `` But it's understandable . It's not the kind of thing that a man would be proud of . And it doesn't make any difference . He sold me a clear title . I have it with me , right here . If you want to see '' -- `` Never mind '' , she said sternly . `` It wouldn't matter to my father , and not to me . I meant what I said about that fire . Be sure it's out when you leave . That's all . I'll let you go back to doing the dishes now '' . It was meant to insult him , and didn't quite succeed . He took the reins just below the bit and held them firmly , and it was his turn to smile now . `` I don't mind washing dishes now and then '' , he said pleasantly . `` It doesn't hurt . It might hurt you , though . Somebody might mistake you for a woman '' . He meant to say more , but he never got the chance . She was quick . She brought the quirt down , slashing it across his cheek , and he tried to step back . She swung the quirt again , and this time he caught her wrist and pulled her out of the saddle . She came down against him , and he tried to break her fall . He grabbed her by the shoulders and went down on one knee , taking her weight so that some of the wind was driven out of him . It made him a little sick , and he let go of her . He got up slowly , and she was already on her feet , and he stood facing her . He wiped the blood from his cheek . `` I ought to '' -- he said . He was shaking with anger , his breath coming in long , painful gasps . `` That quirt -- I ought to use it on you , where it would do the most good . If you were a man '' -- `` She isn't , mister '' . The voice came from behind him , and Wilson turned . The fire had gone down , and the man was only a shadow against the trees . But a moment later he brought his horse forward into the light , and Wilson had a good look at him . He was tall and dark-skinned , a half-breed , Wilson thought . And he was handsome , despite the long thin scar that slanted across his cheek . `` She's not a man , mister '' , he said . `` I am . If you've got any ideas '' . He raised the Winchester and pointed it at Wilson's chest . `` Put the rifle down , Joseph '' , the girl said . She seemed irritated . `` I thought I told you to stay home '' . The half-breed eased the Winchester down and rested it across his lap . The scar looked pure white in the half-darkness ; ; his eyes were black and deep-set , and expressionless . `` You shouldn't be riding up here after dark , Judith '' , he said quietly . `` I can take care of this . It's no job for you '' . The girl tapped the quirt impatiently against her knee and glared at him . He took it without flinching . `` I said go home , Joseph . You've got no business up here '' . The half-breed didn't answer this time . But the scar seemed to pull hard at the corner of his mouth , and his eyes were hurt and angry . It made Wilson wonder . He watched the half-breed as he turned silently . They could hear the pony's feet on the dry leaves for a while , then the sound faded out . Wilson brushed the dust from his coat . `` Who was that '' ? ? He asked . `` Your personal guard ? ? You're pretty hard on him '' . `` He works for my father '' , the girl said , and then seemed to change her mind . `` He's a friend . His name's Joseph Sanchez . Is there anything else you want to know '' ? ? `` Not now '' , Wilson said . `` I guess I'll find out soon enough . You've got blood on your cheek . Not yours . Mine . It must have got there when you fell against me '' . She wiped it off with the sleeve of her coat . `` I'll bet that's as close as you've been to a man since you were a baby '' , Wilson said . He saw her hand start to work down the leather thong toward the handle of the quirt , and he grabbed her wrist . `` Oh , no '' , he said , and he was without humor now . `` I've had enough of that . I've had enough of you . I don't know what goes on around here , and I don't care . I don't know what makes you think you can get away with this kind of business , and I don't care about that , either . You took me by surprise . But I'll know how to handle you next time '' . She brought up her free hand to hit him , but this time he was quicker . He side-stepped her blow and she fell , stumbling against the gelding . She finally regained her balance and got up in the saddle . Her hat had come off and fallen behind her shoulders , held by the string , and he could see her face more clearly than he had at any time before . He had forgotten that she was so pretty . But her prettiness was what he had noticed first , and all the other things had come afterward : cruelty , meanness , self-will . He had known women like that , one woman in particular . And one had been too many . He watched the girl until she had gone into the trees , and waited until he couldn't hear the sound of her horse any longer , then went up to where the children were sleeping . They weren't sleeping , of course , but they thought they were doing him a favor by pretending . He hadn't shown up too well in their eyes , letting himself be browbeaten by a woman . They expected greater things from him , regardless of how trying the circumstances , and they were disappointed . And determined not to show it . They lay a little too stiffly , with their eyes straining to stay closed . `` Go to sleep '' , he said . `` Both of you . There's better things to do than listen to something like that . I'll be down at the creek finishing the dishes , if you want me '' . He found the pan where he had dropped it and carried it back down to the stream . The coyote was calling again , and he hoped that this time there would be no other sounds to interrupt it . Not tonight , at any rate . He had a feeling that the girl meant trouble . If she did , he could stand it better in the light . He scrubbed absent-mindedly at the pans and reflected on how things had turned out . That afternoon when they had pulled up in front of the broken-down ranch house , his hopes had been high . Already some of the pain had gone from Amelia's death . Not all of it . There would still be plenty of moments of regret and sadness and guilty relief . But they were starting a new life . And they had almost everything they needed : land , a house , two whiteface bulls , three horses . The land wasn't all Wilson had expected of it . Six hundred and forty acres , the old man back in St. Louis had said ; ; good grass , good water . Well , the grass was there , though in some places the ground was too steep for a cow to get to it . The water was there , so much of it that it spread all through the dead orchard . And there was a house ; ; livable perhaps , but badly in need of repairs . In the last analysis , though , Wilson had little cause to complain . The place had been cheap -- just the little he had left after Amelia's burial -- and it would serve its purpose . There was only one place where Jake Carwood's description had gone badly awry : the peace and quiet . It hadn't started out that way . And he had a feeling -- thanks to the girl -- that things would get worse before they got better . 2 They had the house cleaned up by noon , and Wilson sent the boy out to the meadow to bring in the horses . He stood on the porch and watched him struggling with the heavy harness , and finally went over to help him . Kathy was already in the wagon . They were going to town , and they were both excited . Wilson backed the team into the traces , and wished they weren't going to town at all . He had an uneasy feeling about it . That girl last night , what was her name ? ? Judith Pierce . It was the only thing about her that was the least bit hard to remember . He finished with the team and filled his pipe and stood looking about him . He had spent two hours riding around the ranch that morning , and in broad daylight it was even less inviting than Judith Pierce had made it seem . There was brush , and stands of pine that no grass could grow under , and places so steep that cattle wouldn't stop to graze . But there was water . There was an artificial lake just out of sight in the first stand of trees , fed by a half dozen springs that popped out of the ground above the hillside orchard . Yes , there was plenty of water , too much , and that was probably the trouble . There were tracks of cattle all over his six hundred and forty acres . The first part of the road was steep , but it leveled off after the second bend and curled gradually into the valley . It was hotter once they reached the flat , and drier , but the grass was better . A warm breeze played across it , moving it like waves . A red-tailed hawk flew in behind them and stayed there , watching for any snakes or rabbits that they might stir up from the side of the road . It took them an hour before they came to the first houses of Kelseyville . The town was about what Wilson expected : one main street with its rows of false-fronted buildings , a water tower , a few warehouses , a single hotel ; ; all dusty and sunbaked . The place was quiet . Such was my state of mind that I did not question the possibility of this ; ; under the circumstances I was only too willing to confess all . I was nearly thirty at the time . I went to the hall in the afternoons only , on these preliminary matters . It was dark and , I sensed , very large ; ; only the counter at one end was lighted by a long fluorescent tube suspended directly above it . Sometimes I was aware of people moving about in the darkness . I would turn away from my writing in the hope of getting a good look at them but I never quite succeeded . A glimpse of three of four vague figures , at the most . Drifting here and there . Squatting , as if waiting . The pulsing glow of a cigarette . Since they could see me but I not them , their presence in the hall disturbed me . The clerk paid them no attention . This impressed me , until I realized how limited was his sphere of influence . His job simply consisted in registering new men . When the phone rang he answered it . His authority extended to the far edge of the counter , no further . None of the men hanging around the hall bothered to speak to him . Baldness was attacking his pate . He spoke to me in a gruff voice , an affectation which quite belied his personality . He wore his white shirt open at the neck , revealing a bit of scrawny pale chest underneath . It was obvious that he wished himself different from the sort of person he thought he was . But it was not easy for him and he often slipped . When one of the men in the hall behind us spat on the floor and scraped his boot over the gob of spittle I noticed how the clerk winced . I felt certain he was really a spineless little man . His hat ( the cause of his baldness ? ? ) hung on a hook on the wall , and underneath it I could see his tie , knotted , ready to be slipped over his head , a black badge of frayed respectability that ought never to have left his neck . The morning's tabloids were on the counter , and a stack of dog-eared men's magazines . On a shelf in the office behind the counter was a small radio dialed permanently on a station which broadcast only vulgar commercials and cheap popular music . Everything about the clerk was trivial . Once , pressing him , I learned that his job was only part-time , in the afternoons when nothing went on in the hall . Noticing my disappointment he attempted to salvage what scraps and shreds of authority he felt might still be clinging to his person . With distaste I saw him assume a pompous air . When he saw me coming he turned his radio off . He made a show of rearranging my forms on the shelf . He would pick up the ringing phone with studied negligence , then bark into it with gruff importance . What limited knowledge he possessed he forced upon me . In the mornings , I was informed , fluorescent tubes , similar to the one above the counter , illuminated the entire hall . They , and the two large fans which I could dimly see as daylight filtered through their vents , down at the far end of the hall , could be turned on by a master switch situated inside the office . He pointed out the switch to me and for a moment I foolishly believed that he would let deed follow words . I was shown , instead , a batch of white tickets of the sort handed out , he told me , every morning . Now , here was something of obvious importance to me , yet when I reached for the tickets he snatched them away from my hand . He couldn't afford to have anyone mess around with them , he said . Each of those tickets was of great value to its rightful recipient . I withdrew my hand . Later I would remember what this pompous little man had told me about the worth of a ticket . Having nothing else to do except wait for my forms to be processed , I gave myself over to speculations concerning the hall itself . When suitably lighted , what would it look like ? ? The presence of the two exhaust fans seemed to indicate that the hall could become crowded for air . One afternoon , upon receiving permission and the necessary instructions from the clerk , I had visited the toilet adjoining the hall . By counting the number of stalls and urinals I attempted to form a loose estimate of how many men the hall would hold at one time . For although I had crossed a corner of the hall on my way to the toilet I still could not tell for sure how far to the rear the darkness extended . I could observe the two fans down at the end , but their size in themselves meant nothing to me as long as I had no measure of comparison . I had for some time been hoping , in vain , for one of the dim figures to pass between the fan vents and myself . I knew that three or four of them were almost always present in the hall , but what they were doing , and exactly where , I could not tell . It was , I felt , possible that they were men who , having received no tickets for that day , had remained in the hall , to sleep perhaps , in the corners farthest removed from the counter with its overhead light . This light did not penetrate very far back into the hall , and my eyes were hindered rather than aided by the dim daylight entering through the fan vents when I tried to pick out whatever might be lying , or squatting , on the floor below . Also the clerk appeared to disapprove of my frequent curious glances back over my shoulder . No sooner would I turn my head away from the counter before he would address me , at times quite sharply , in order to bring back my attention . And I had hardly finished my business in the toilet on the aforementioned occasion when the lights in that place , like the hall lights controlled from the switch in the office , flicked off and on impatiently . This sort of petty vigilance annoyed me . I felt certain it was self-appointed . It sprang from a type of mentality I'd encountered often enough but certainly had not expected to find here . I decided to see no more of the clerk until the processing of my papers was completed . I felt strongly attached to the hall , however , and hardly a day passed when I did not go to look at it from a distance . I lived in a state of suspense because of it . I could not cling to my past nor did I wish to . I had signed it off on the forms . My future lay solely with the hall , yet what did I know about the hall at this point ? ? Although I had been inside it I had not yet seen it functioning . I wished to prepare myself but did not even know what sort of clothes I ought to be wearing . I did not despair , however ; ; far from it ! ! I was constantly searching for clues around the neighborhood of the hall . Though only a relatively short walk separated it from my own part of town , its character was wholly foreign to me . Large warehouses flanked the street on which the hall fronted . The river was only a few blocks away but an unbroken line of piers prevented me from seeing it . Sometimes I noticed the tops of ships' masts and funnels reaching above the pier roofs . The sounds issuing from beyond -- winches whirring , men shouting -- indicated great activity and excited me . The hall , on the other hand , appeared lifeless and deserted on these long waterfront afternoons . It resembled nothing I'd ever seen before . Its front was windowless , but irregularities in the masonry might be an indication that windows , now blinded , had once looked out upon the street . I kept circling the block hoping to see , from the street behind it , the rear of the hall . But it was not a tall structure and other buildings concealed it . For weeks I wandered about this neighborhood of warehouses and garages , truck terminals and taxi repair shops , gasoline pumps and longshoremen's lunch counters , yet never did I cease to feel myself a stranger there . I returned to the hall , despite my dislike for the clerk . As I had expected , he insisted that my visits to the hall would do nothing to further the process of my application . Meanwhile spring had passed well into summer . At last , when I put it to him directly , the clerk was forced to admit that the delay in my case was unusual . When I asked him what , if anything , I could do about it , he surprised me by referring me to the director of the hall . I could consult this personage on any weekday morning , though not before ten o'clock . The clerk impressed this upon me : that I should not arrive in the hall before ten o'clock . When I went for my interview with the director I saw why . Although it was dark as usual I could see that the hall had only recently contained a great many people . Cigarette butts littered the floor . The big fans were going , drawing from the large room the remnants of stale smoke which drifted about in pale strata underneath the ceiling . I had felt the draft they were making while mounting the stairs . The staircase itself seemed still to be echoing the heavy footfalls of many men . I stopped by the counter . No one was behind it , but in the rear wall of the office I noticed , for the first time , a door which had been left partially open . Past it I could see part part of a desk , a flag in a corner , a rug on the floor . The director's office . I rapped my knuckles on the counter . The director came to the door . I was at once disappointed , although just what I had expected him to look like I could not have explained . He was a man in his late forties , with graying hair , of medium height ; ; he looked dapper in a lightweight summer suit , brown silk tie and green-tinted soft collar . He wore perforated , white-topped shoes ; ; they somehow made me expect to see him launch into a vaudeville tapdance routine any moment . But he came toward me sedately enough , showed me around the counter , offered me a seat inside his office , then walked to a file cabinet and got out my application . I had the impression that he had read my forms , perhaps several times . He did not look at them now . As he lowered himself on the chair behind his desk I wondered what this dapper , slightly ridiculous man could possibly have to do with the workings of the hall . He spoke , in a voice as immaculate as his appearance . Why had I registered ? ? Begging my pardon , he must express his astonishment over seeing a person of my background applying at the hall . He had looked over my forms and was impressed by what he had seen there ; ; indeed , my scholastic qualifications were such that he , a college graduate himself , must envy me them . Was I sure , he asked , that I knew what I was applying for ? ? What sort of men I would come into contact with , at the hall ? ? These questions did not surprise me ; ; I felt certain that the director , like the afternoon clerk , seldom moved beyond the counter , that the hall , to them , was a jungle , a dark and unwelcome place . Though I doubted that he would understand me , I told the director my motives for applying . I had always , I said , hankered after working hard with my hands . This desire , I went on , growing voluble as my conviction was aroused , had mounted at such a rate recently that I now found its realization necessary not only to my physical but also to my spiritual wellbeing . To this effect I had already severed all connections which bound me to my former existence . The flat , hard cap was small , but he thrust it to the back of his head . `` Tie him up '' . `` Hell with it '' . Before they could guess his intention Rankin stepped forward and swung the guard's own gun against the uncovered head , hard . The man went over without sound , falling to the bare floor . Barton said harshly , `` Why did you do that '' ? ? Rankin sneered at him . `` What did you want me to do , kiss him ? ? He dumped me in solitary twice '' . Barton caught the lighter man's shoulder and swung him around . `` Let's get one thing straight , you and me . The only reason we brought you was to get Miller out . If you ever try anything without my orders I'll kill you '' . Fred Rankin looked at him . It seemed to Barton that the green eyes mocked him , the thin-lipped smile held insolence , but he had no time to waste now . `` Come on . Let's move '' . They filed out through the guard-room door , into the paved square . There were three other men within this prison whom Barton would have liked to liberate , but they were in other cell blocks . There was no chance . They moved slowly , toward the main gate , following the wall . There was no moon . They had chosen this night purposely . They reached the guard house without alerting the men on the walls above , and Powers slipped through the door . Two men were on duty inside , playing pinochle , relaxed . They looked up in surprise as Powers came in . `` What are you doing out of the block '' ? ? `` It's Curtiss '' , he said , naming the man Rankin had hit . `` I've got to have help '' . They stared at him . The sergeant in charge climbed to his feet . `` What's wrong with him '' ? ? `` He's having some kind of a fit '' . The sergeant turned to the door . As he passed through it Barton shoved his gun against the man's side . `` One sound and you're dead '' . The sergeant froze . Powers had not followed . Powers was covering the remaining guard . The man half-reached for the cord of the alarm bell . Powers knocked his arm aside . Deliberately , with none of Rankin's viciousness , he laid the barrel of his gun alongside the guard's head . They were free . Even Barton could not quite believe it . It had gone without a hitch . They slid through the wicket in the big gate , ghosted across the dark ground . Five minutes later they reached the horses . Barton was relieved to see that Carl Dill and Emmett Foster had brought extra mounts . He had been worried that with Miller and Rankin added to the escape party they would be short . No one hurried . They walked the horses , heading along the river , Barton and Emmett Foster in the lead , seven men riding quietly through the night . The only thing which would have attracted attention was that two wore the uniform of prison guards , three the striped suits of convicts . Five miles . In a small grove against the river they halted , turning deep into the protection of the trees . Foster had brought extra clothing also . A good man , Emmett . He had been one of the original Night Riders , one who had escaped the trial . It was to him that Barton had sent Carl Dill on Dill's release from the prison . Clyde Miller was crying softly to himself , shedding his striped suit and fumbling into the nondescript butternut pants , the worn brown shirt . Kid Boyd was unusually silent , Rankin watchful , a few paces apart . Barton finished his dressing and extended his hand to Powers . `` I won't even try to thank you '' . The ex-prison guard was embarrassed . He said in a studied voice , `` I didn't do it for you . I did it for the valley . You're the only man the Night Riders will follow . We've been starving and I don't like to starve '' . Barton turned away , his eyes falling upon Rankin beside his horse . `` Good luck '' . The murderer lifted his head . `` Meaning you want me to ride out '' ? ? `` You aren't one of us . There's nothing for you here '' . `` I got no place to go '' . Barton hesitated . He did not trust Rankin , his violent temper , his killer instinct . But ten years in prison had taught him realities . They were in a fight , outweighed in both numbers and money . It was all right to put a bunch of ranchers onto horses , to call them Night Riders , to set out to attack the largest mining combination the country had ever seen if all they wanted was adventure . But if they really hoped to succeed they needed professionals , men who knew how to use a gun against men , who would match the killers on the other side . `` Your choice '' , he said briefly , and turned to Kid Boyd . `` Bury those uniforms so they won't be found '' . Then Barton touched Carl Dill's arm and moved off , up the river bank . He wanted a careful , uninterrupted report from Dill on the conditions in the valley . They squatted on their heels in the deep mud and Dill found a cigar in his breast pocket , passing it over silently . He too knew the agony of going for weeks , sometimes months without the solace of tobacco . Mitchell Barton drew in the fragrance deeply , letting the smoke lie warm and soothing in his throat for a moment before he exhaled . Through the gloom he could not see the man beside him clearly but he knew him thoroughly . For his first five years in prison , they had shared a cell . Carl Dill was neither a rancher nor a valley man . He had been the auditor for the mining syndicate , and he had stolen fifty thousand dollars of the syndicate's money . He had done time for the theft . The one thing they had in common was their hatred . Both hated Donald Kruger . It had drawn them together , and since his release from prison Dill had worked tirelessly to effect this night's escape . He said now , `` I've got the perfect headquarters set up . The old Haskell mine '' . Mitch Barton knew the place . Twenty years before a group of Easterners had bought out the Haskell claims in the rocky hills south of Grass Valley . They had spent a million dollars , carving in a road , putting up buildings , drilling their haulage tunnel . Then the vein had petered out and the whole project had been abandoned . `` The road's washed badly '' , said Dill , `` but there's a trail you can get over with a horse . A company of cavalry couldn't come in there if two men were guarding that trail '' . Barton nodded . `` How do the valley people feel '' ? ? `` As mad as ever . But Kruger's men keep them off balance , and they don't trust me . I'm an outsider . When they learn you're in the hills though , they'll rally , don't worry about that '' . Barton waited for a long moment , then asked the question which lay always uppermost in his mind . `` My boy . Did you find him '' ? ? Dill was silent as if he hated to answer , and Barton had a cold , sick feeling of apprehension . `` He's in Morgan's Ferry '' . Barton half-straightened in surprise . `` What's he doing there '' ? ? Again Dill hesitated . `` Dealing faro '' . `` Dealing faro ? ? How come '' ? ? `` Your sister-in-law has the faro bank in Cap Ayres' saloon '' . Barton cursed under his breath . After another long pause he asked , `` How many people know who they are '' ? ? `` Everyone . Your cousin Finley saw to that . He's quite a rat , you know . He sold out to Kruger's men . He's informed them of everything you've ever written him . He wants your ranch '' . Barton stood up . He said tensely , `` All right . Let's go get the boy '' . Dill had come up also . `` I was afraid of this . I almost didn't tell you '' . `` If you hadn't I'd have killed you '' . Dill's voice tightened . `` But you can't ride into the Ferry . That's what they'll expect you to do . They'll be there waiting for you . I understand how you feel about the child . '' `` The hell you do '' . Barton's voice was rougher than Dill had ever heard it . `` I never saw him . My wife died in childbirth after I was sent away . `` I can't leave him there . Donald Kruger would like nothing better than to hold him as hostage , and I wouldn't entrust a snake to his tender care . I've got to get the boy . Let's ride '' . Chapter two Barton's men cut the telegraph wires in half a dozen places , carrying away whole sections to make repairs more difficult . It was over an hour before their escape was discovered , but still the news that Barton was free flashed across the central portion of the state . It reached Donald Kruger in his massive home in Burlingame . It reached the mines at North San Juan and Bloomfield . It brought men out of bed and sent them into hurried conferences . For everyone involved knew that the whole valley was a powder keg , and Mitchell Barton the fuse which could send it into explosive violence . Creighton Hague sat in his office above the Ione pit . The office was of logs , four rooms , each heated by an iron stove . The building was dwarfed by the scene outside . There a dozen giant monitors played their seventy-five-foot jets of water against the huge seam of tertiary gravel which was the mountainside . The gravel was the bed of an ancient river , buckled in some prehistoric upheaval of earth . It was partially cemented by ages and pressure , yet it crumpled before the onslaught of the powerful streams , the force of a thousand fire hoses , and with the gold it held washed down through the long sluices . A million dollars' of gold a month . A million tons of rock and soil and brush . The monitors ran twenty-four hours each day . Their roar , like the swelling volume of a hundred tornadoes could be heard for miles . Hague , like all who worked near the pits , was partly deafened from the constant assault against his eardrums . He was a big man , wearing a neat flannel shirt against the cold foothill air . Fat showed in loose rolls beneath the shirt . Ten years older than Mitch Barton , he had clawed his way up from mucker in the pits to manager of the operation . He was proud of his accomplishments , proud of his job , proud that Donald Kruger and his associates trusted him . He lived and breathed for the mining company . No man could have reached his spot nor held it without being ruthless , and Hague had made a virtue of ruthlessness all of his life . There came a ghost of noise at the office door and Hague swung to see Kodyke in the entrance from the outer room . Hague had never accustomed himself to Kodyke . The man was tall , thin , with a narrow face and a too-large nose . The eyes always held Hague , eyes of a dead man , lidless as a lizard's , with the fixed intensity of a cobra . Even Hague was repelled by the machinelike deadliness that was Kodyke . He knew nothing about the man's history . Kodyke had appeared at the mine one day bearing a letter from Kruger . Kodyke was to head the dread company police . He ran the change rooms . He threw out the hi-graders . He supervised the cleanups and handled the shipments of raw gold which each week went out to San Francisco . Hague squeezed down his uneasy dislike . He pulled open the top drawer of his desk and drew out a tintype . `` This is Mitchell Barton . He broke out of Folsom last night . Apparently he bribed one of the guards . We want him back there or we want him dead '' . Kodyke took the picture in a lean hand , studying it thoughtfully . `` Dangerous '' ? ? `` Dangerous , yes . You know how the ranchers in the valley are . They blame us for all their troubles . Ten years ago they blew up some of our ditches . It cost us a hundred thousand dollars and thirty days lost time to fix them . We don't want Barton's Night Riders loose again '' . The gunman nodded , slipping the picture into his breast pocket , saying nothing . Normally Hague wasted no words , but now he found himself unable to stop their flow although he knew Kodyke was aware of all he said . If she sensed any unusual preoccupation on the part of her mother , she did not comment upon it . After they had finished eating , Melissa took Sprite the kitten under her arm -- `` so that Auntie Grace can teach it about the whistle '' -- and climbed into the station wagon beside her mother . She had offered to walk , but Pamela knew she would not feel comfortable about her child until she had personally confided her to the care of the little pink woman who chose to be called `` Auntie '' . When they reached their neighbor's house , Pamela said a few polite words to Grace and kissed Melissa lightly on the forehead , the impulse prompted by a stray thought -- of the type to which she was frequently subject these days -- that they might never see one another again . Then she turned the station wagon around and headed it back down the hill , with the village as her ostensible destination . As she drove , she thought about her plan . It was really quite simple . So simple , in fact , that it might even work -- although Pamela , now , in her new frame of mind , was careful not to pretend too much assurance . That mistake , she thought , had cost her dearly these past few days , and she wanted to avoid falling into any more of the traps that the mountain might set for her . She must be cautious so as not to alert the scheming forest . When the station wagon drew abreast of the dusty dirt road that led up to the porch of the Culver house , Pamela turned the wheel , guiding the car to its familiar parking spot close to the house , and stopped . All of her movements were careful and methodical , partaking of the stealth of a criminal who has plotted his felony for months in advance and knows exactly which step to take next in the course of the final execution of his crime . She locked the ignition , removed the keys , stepped out of the car and went into the house . Here , she dropped the keys on a small table beside the door and went upstairs to her bedroom . On her bureau lay a small , brass ornament of simple design and faded engraving -- an object which , Pamela believed now , had been the property of her great-grandfather , Major Hiram Munroe Culver . He had belonged to this land and , perhaps , had desecrated it -- and this was the only material symbol that remained of him . If she , Pamela , were being held responsible for his crimes , then hers must be the final act of expiation . She would return this symbol to the mountain , as one pours seed back into the soil every Spring or as ancient fertility cults demand annual human sacrifice . Slowly and thoughtfully , she slipped the ornament into the pocket of her slacks , moved down the stairs and out of the house . There was only one place where the mountain might receive her -- that unnamed , unnameable pool harbored in its secret bosom . Atonement , if atonement were possible , could only be made at that sacred , sacrificial basin . It was there that she would have to enact her renunciation , beg forgiveness . Perhaps it was insane , Pamela thought . Perhaps it was all a vividly conceived dream . But she was caught in it , and she faced the terrible possibility that , if it were a dream , it was one from which she might never awaken . Facing the forest now , she who had not dared to enter it before , walked between two trees at random and headed in what she believed was the direction of the pool . She remembered little of her previous journey there with Grace , and she could but hope that her dedication to her mission would enable her to accomplish it . The forest was open and freely welcoming , extending an enchanted hand . The ground was covered with soft pine needles and the slope was gentle . Birds chirped and chattered in the trees and the sun , all dewy-eyed and soft , caressed her shoulders warmly from time to time . It was not , thought Pamela , such an evil place after all . No wonder Melissa responded so completely to its beckoning . Perhaps she had no reason to fear these trees that whispered their secrets above her head as she passed . Was it not possible , after all , that the forest was in league with her and her child that its sympathy lay with the Culvers that she had erred in failing to understand this ? ? Pamela felt calm and peaceful as she walked along . The slight flutter that had disturbed the motion of her heart when she entered the forest was gone now , and even the dim groves of trees through which she occasionally passed did not reawaken her fear . She regarded them as signs that she was nearing the glen she sought , and she was glad to at last be doing something positive in her unenunciated , undefined struggle with the mountain and its darkling inhabitants . Having persisted too long in deliberate ignorance and denial of the forces that threatened her , Pamela was relieved now to admit their potency and to be taking definite steps toward grappling with them . A few days ago , she would have thought such an expedition as this utterly ridiculous ; ; today , on the contrary , it seemed utterly reasonable . She did not pause to consider what she would do if her plan should fail ; ; she directed all of her mental and physical energy toward achieving this one goal . If , as she walked , her steps fumbled from time to time , she chose to ignore that omen . If the slope grew steeper and the groves more dim , she tried not to heed . Success depended upon maintaining her equanimity ; ; she must be poised and proud and unafraid in order to prove to the mountain that she was in earnest . The forest took on an impersonal aspect . It did not care what sort of person prowled its woods , plucked at its bark or stripped the berries from its bushes . Unconcerned , indifferent , unmotivated , the forest was simply there -- fighting man's depredations with more abundant growth and man's follies with its own musical evening laughter . Red man or white man , pacifist or killer , the forest would accept them all -- knowing that it could thrive equally well on slaughter and beneficence ; ; knowing that its ageless mass would always dwarf the short span of time allotted to any man . Pamela shook her head . She must not think about time . That was another one of those traps . In her grim pursuit of tranquillity , Pamela focused her thoughts on her husband . If , when this was all over , she found the words to tell him about it , she wondered if he would ever understand . How could he comprehend her need when he himself was innocent ? ? Indian ghosts would not impinge upon his nights , nor would his days be haunted by the dimly-outlined , ill-conceived figure of her benighted ancestor . His bright , daylight mind would whistle away such images ; ; they would not dare to face his scoffing . Pamela was glad Jim was nowhere near . His presence would have interfered with her duty . The mountainside grew steeper and she slipped once or twice on the smooth pine needles . The trees huddled more closely together , their limbs and leaves intertwined in a coarse curtain against the sun . Bushes and vines abetted the rocks in forming thorny detours for the struggling stranger , and without the direct light of the sun to act as compass , Pamela could no longer be positive of her direction . Nevertheless , she continued to move upward . She was sure she would reach the pool by climbing , and she clung to that belief despite the increasing number of obstacles . The forest had become an alien world where she strove , alone , unprotected , unguided , to deal with whatever hindrances were offered . It was a bold , dark castle of pine boughs that stood like a medieval fortress , eclipsing the sun and human time . At one and the same time , she was within it but still searching for the drawbridge that would give her entry . Silence came into the forest -- a solid being that clapped its hand over the murmuring mouths of the birds and the whispered comfort of the trees . Silence walked at Pamela's side , its presence numbingly close , yet too far for her to hear . Silence stood in front of her , waiting , and in back of her , blocking her retreat . She stumbled over the root of a tree that protruded maliciously above the earth . In spite of her attempt to preserve her balance , she fell , bruising her arm on a naked stone . For a moment , she could not catch her breath and then , her breath returning in short , frightened spasms , she lifted herself to her feet laboriously . She started to brush the dirt and bits of leaves off her clothes . Her arm bled slightly , and the offended skin cried out in pain . She looked around . She was bewildered . She seemed to have come such a long distance -- too far for her destination which had wilfully been swallowed up in the greedy gloom of the trees . She stood quite still , trying to focus upon a direction in which to turn , a path to follow , a clue to guide her . She was standing in a thick grove . The trees were crowded so closely together that their branches overlapped , virtually shutting out the sun completely . The earth smelled moist and pungent as it might in a cave deprived of the cleansing effect of the sun's rays . She had the feeling that , under the mouldering leaves , there would be the bodies of dead animals , quietly decaying and giving their soil back to the mountain . The thought made Pamela shudder . A terrible chill swept through the grove . Not a breeze exactly , but a pocket of icy air that settled with a loathsome familiarity upon the deep confines of the grove , catching Pamela in a leering embrace . There was a peculiar density about it , a thick substance that could be sensed but never identified , never actually perceived . Where before had she felt or dreamt or imagined such a scene ? ? She already knew this unwholesome , chilling atmosphere that was somehow grotesquely alive . It enclosed her clammy hands and twined around her ankles . It crept into the open neck of her blouse and slid down her body , seeping into her flesh through all the quivering pores of her skin . It crawled across her breasts , suffocating the life in her nipples . It circled her thighs , exploring with its icy tentacles . It entered her body with the ghastly intimacy of an incubus , and its particles , spreading , creeping , crawling , joined themselves into steel bands that constricted her knees so tightly that they ached ; ; stifled her lungs so that her breath came in harsh gasps ; ; clutched her throat and sucked up the moisture in her mouth so that her tongue was dry and hard and stuck to the roof of her mouth and her teeth were clenched together in the rigid fixture of her jaws . She had to get away from here before this demoniac possession swallowed up the liquid of her eyes and sank into the fibers of her brain , depriving her of reason and sight . But she did not know which way to go . The shadows of the trees engulfed her , foreclosing every possible exit from the grove . She had been snared here by a vile sensuality that writhed around her throat in ever-tightening circles . She could not scream , for even if a sound could take shape within her parched mouth , who would hear , who would listen ? ? Does the mountain listen ? ? Pamela groped blindly . She had to escape . She had to move in some direction -- any direction that would take her away from this evil place . She thrust forward through the shadows and the trees that resisted her and tried to fling her back . Her own body protested , aching painfully where the blood in her veins had congealed , where cold demon wisps still clung and caressed . Every movement she made seemed unnecessarily noisy . Twigs cracked loudly under her feet ; ; bushes swished and scratched at her slacks ; ; tree branches snapped as she pushed them ruthlessly away from her . Miraculously , she found exactly the right statement . She began it deliberately , so that none of her words would be lost on him . `` I want to tell you something Thomas DeMontez Lord . I'm well aware that you've got a pedigree as long as my leg , and that I don't amount to anything . But '' -- `` But it don't matter a-tall '' , Lord supplied fondly . `` To me you'll always be the girl o' my dreams , an' the sweetest flower that grows '' . Beaming idiotically , he pooched out his lips and attempted to kiss her . She yanked away from him furiously . `` You shut up ! ! Shu-tt up-pp ! ! I've got something to say to you , and by God you're going to listen . Do you hear me ? ? You're going to listen '' ! ! Lord nodded agreeably . He said he wanted very much to listen . He knew that anything a brainy little lady like her had to say would be plumb important , as well as pleasin' to the ear , and he didn't want to miss a word of it . So would she mind speaking a little louder ? ? `` I think you stink , Tom Lord ! ! I think you're mean and hateful and stupid , and -- louder '' ? ? Said Joyce . `` Uh-huh . So I can hear you while I'm checkin' the car . Looks like we might be in for a speck of trouble '' . He opened the door and got out . He waited at the car side for a moment , looking down at her expectantly . `` Well ? ? Wasn't you goin' to say somethin' '' ? ? Then , helpfully , as she merely stared at him in weary silence , `` Maybe you could write it down for me , huh ? ? Print it in real big letters , an' I can cipher it out later '' . `` Aah , go on '' , she said . `` Just go the hell on '' . He grinned , nodded , and walked around to the front of the car . Lips pursed mournfully , he stared down at its crazily sagging left side . Then he hunkered down on the heels of his handmade boots , peered into the orderly chaos of axle , shock absorber , and spring . He went prone on his stomach , the better to pursue his examination . After a time , he straightened again , brushing the red Permian dust from his hands , slapping it from his six-dollar levis and his tailored , twenty-five-dollar shirt . He wore no gun -- a strange ommission for a peace officer in this country . Never , he'd once told Joyce , had he encountered any man or situation that called for a gun . And he really feels that way , she thought . That's really all he's got , all he is . Just a big pile of self-confidence in an almost teensy package . If I could make myself feel the same way She studied him hopefully , yearningly ; ; against the limitless background of sky and wasteland it was easy to confirm her analysis . Here in the God-forsaken place , the westerly end of nowhere , Tom Lord looked almost insignificant , almost contemptible . He was handsome , with his coal-black hair and eyes , his fine-chiseled features . But she'd known plenty of handsomer guys , and , conceding his good looks , what was there left ? ? He wasn't a big man ; ; rather on the medium side . Neither was he very powerful of build . He could move very quickly , she knew ( although he seldom found occasion to do so ) , but he was more wiry than truly strong . And his relatively small hands and feet gave him an almost delicate appearance . Just nothing , she told herself . Just so darned sure of himself that he puts the Indian sign on everyone . But , by gosh , I want him and I'm going to have him ! ! He caught her eye , came back around the car with the boot-wearer ; ; teetering , half-mincing walk . Why did these yokels still wear boots , anyway , when most had scarcely sat a horse in years ? ? He slid in at her side , tucked a cigar into his mouth , and politely proffered one to her . `` Oh , cut it out , Tom '' ! ! She snapped . `` Can't you stop that stupid clowning for even a minute '' ? ? `` This ain't your brand , maybe '' , Lord suggested . `` Or maybe you just don't feel like a cigar '' ? ? `` I feel like getting back to town , that's what I feel like ! ! Now , are you going to take me or am I supposed to walk '' ? ? `` Might get there faster walkin' '' , Lord drawled , `` seein' as how I got a busted front spring . On the other hand , howsomever , maybe you wouldn't either . I figger it's probl'y a sixty-five-mile walk , and I c'n maybe get this spring patched up in a couple of hours '' . `` How -- with what ? ? There's nothing out here but rattlesnakes '' . `` Now , ain't it the truth '' ? ? Lord laughed with secret amusement . `` Not a danged thing but rattlesnakes , so I reckon I'll get the boss rattler to help me '' . `` Tom ! ! For God's sake '' ! ! `` Looky '' . He pointed , cutting her off . `` See that wildcat '' ? ? She saw it then , the distant derrick of the wildcat -- a test well in unexplored country . And even with her limited knowledge of such things , she knew that the car could be repaired there ; ; sufficiently , at least , to get them back into town . A wildcatter had to be prepared for almost any emergency . He had to depend on himself , since he was invariably miles and hours away from others . `` Well , let's get going '' , she said impatiently . `` I '' -- She broke off , frowning . `` What did you mean by that rattlesnake gag ? ? Getting the boss rattlesnake to help you '' ? ? `` Why , I meant what I said '' , Lord declared . `` What else would I mean , anyways '' ? ? She looked at him , lips compressed . Then , with a shrug of pretended indifference , she took a compact from her purse and went through the motions of fixing her make-up . In his mood , it was the best way to handle him ; ; that is , to show no curiosity whatsoever . Otherwise , she would be baited into a tantrum -- teased and provoked until she lost control of herself , and thus lost still another battle in the maddening struggle of Tom Lord Vs. Joyce Lakewood . The car lurched along at a snail's crawl , the left-front mudguard banging and scraping against the tire , occasionally scraping against the road itself . Lord whistled tunelessly as he fought the steering wheel . He seemed very pleased with himself , as though some intricate scheme was working out exactly as he had planned . Along with this self-satisfaction , however , Joyce sensed a growing tension . It poured out of him like an electric current , a feeling that the muscles and nerves of his fine-drawn body were coiling for action , and that that action would be all that he anticipated . Joyce had seen him like this once before -- more than once , actually , but on one particularly memorable occasion . That was the day that he had practically mopped up the main street of Big Sands with Aaron McBride , field boss for the Highlands Oil & Gas Company . Tom had been laying for Aaron McBride for a long time , just waiting to catch him out of line . McBride gave him his opportunity when he showed up in town with a pistol on his hip . He had a legitimate reason for wearing it . It was payday for Highlands , and he was packing a lot of money back into the oil fields . Moreover , as long as the weapon was carried openly , the sheriff's office had made no previous issue of it . `` So what's this all about '' ? ? He demanded , when Lord confronted him . I'm not the only man in town with a gun , or the only one without a permit '' . It was the wrong thing to say . By failing to do as he was told instantly -- to take out a permit or return the gun to his car -- he had played into Lord's hands . The trouble was that he had virtually had to protest . The deputy had forced him to by his manner of accosting him . So , `` How about it '' ? ? He said . `` Why single me out on this permit deal '' ? ? `` Well , I'll tell you about that '' , Lord told him . `` We aim t' be see-lective , y'know ? ? Don't like to bother no one unless we have to , which I figger we do , in your case . Figger we got to be plumb careful with any of you Highlands big shots '' . McBride reddened . He himself had heard that there was gangster money in the company , but that had nothing to do with him . He was an honest man doing a hard job , and the implication that he was anything else was unbearable . `` Look , Lord '' , he said hoarsely . `` I know you've got a grudge against me , and maybe I can't blame you . You think that Highlands swindled you and I helped 'em do it . But you're all wrong , man ! ! I'm no lawyer . I just do what I'm told , and '' -- `` uh-huh . An' that could mean trouble with a fella that's workin' for crooks . So you get rid of that pistol right now , Mis-ter McBride . You do that or take you out a permit right now '' . McBride couldn't do either , of course . Not immediately , as the deputy demanded . Not without a face-saving respite of at least a few minutes . To do so would make his job well-nigh impossible . Oil-field workers were a rough-tough lot . How could he exert authority over them -- make them toe the line , as he had to -- if he knuckled under to this small-town clown ? ? `` I'll get around to it a little later '' , he mumbled desperately . `` Just as soon as I go to the bank , and '' -- `` huh-uh . Now , Mis-ter McBride '' , said Lord , and he laid a firmly restraining hand on the field boss's arm . It was strictly the deputy's game , but McBride had gone too far to throw in . Now , he could only play the last card in what was probably the world's coldest deck . He flung off Lord's hand and attempted to push past him , inadvertently shoving him into a storefront . It was practically the last move that McBride made of his own volition . Lord slugged him in the stomach , so hard that the organ almost pressed against his spine . Then , as he doubled , gasping , vomiting the breakfast he had so lately eaten , Lord straightened him with an uppercut . A rabbit punch redoubled him . And then there was a numbing blow to the heart , and another gut-flattening blow to the stomach But he couldn't keep up with them . No more could he defend himself against them . He seemed to be fighting not one man but a dozen . And he could no longer think of face-saving , of honor , but only of escape . Why , he's going to kill me , he thought wildly . I meant him no harm . I've given willful hurt to no man . I was just doing my job , just following orders , and for that he's going to kill me . Beat me to death in front of a hundred people . Somehow more terrible than the certainty that he was about to die was the knowledge that Lord would probably not suffer for it : the murder would go unpunished . He , McBride , would be cited as in the wrong , and he , Lord , would go scot-free , an officer who had only done his duty , though perhaps too energetically . McBride staggered into the street , flopped sprawling in the stinging dust . Fear-maddened , fleeing the lengthening shadow of death , he scrambled to his feet again . He couldn't see ; ; he was long past the point of coherent thinking . Dimly , he heard laughter , hoots of derision , but he could not read the racket properly . He could not grasp that Lord had withdrawn from the fight minutes ago , and that his leaden arms were flailing at nothing but the air . He hated them too much to understand -- the people of this isolated law-unto-itself world that was Lord's world . This , he was sure , was the way they would act ; ; laughing at a dying man , laughing as a man was beaten to death . And nothing would be done about it . Nothing unless Donna ! ! Donna , his young wife , the girl who was both daughter and wife to him . Donna was like he was . She lived by the rules , never compromising , never blinded or diverted by circumstance . And Donna would -- When he regained consciousness he was in Lord's house , in the office of Doctor Lord , the deputy's deceased father . The Brannon outfit -- known as the Slash-B because of its brand -- reached Hondo Creek before sundown . The herd was watered and then thrown onto a broad grass flat which was to be the first night's bedground . Two of the new hands , a Mexican named Jose Amado and a kid known only as Laredo , were picked for the first trick of riding night herd . The rest of the crew offsaddled their mounts and turned them into the remuda . They got tin cups of coffee from the big pot on the coosie's fire , rolled and lighted brown-paper cigarettes , lounged about . There was some idle talk , a listless discussion of this or that small happening during the day's drive . But they deliberately avoided the one subject that had them all curious : the failure of the boss's wife and son to join the outfit . It especially bothered the older hands . The cook , Mateo Garcia , had arrived there long before the herd . He'd started a fire and put coffee on , and now was busy at the work board of his chuck wagon . He was readying a batch of sourdough biscuits for the Dutch oven . Supper would be ready within the hour . The Maguire family was setting up a separate camp nearby . Billie had unhitched the mules from both Tom Brannon's and his father's wagon . Hank had gathered wood for a cookfire , and his wife was busy at it now . Conchita kept an eye on the twins and little Elena , trying to keep them from falling into the creek by which they persisted in playing . Conchita nagged at the younger children , attempting without success to keep her thoughts off Tom Brannon . Tom Brannon had caught up with the outfit shortly after the Maguires joined it , which had been at midday . He'd come alone , without his wife and child . He'd been in an angry mood : Conchita had thought his face almost ugly with the anger in him . She wondered what had taken place in town , between him and his wife . She wished that she could talk to her mother about it . Not that her mother knew what had happened , but they could speculate upon it . But her mother would rebuke her if she mentioned it , and say that it was none of her concern . `` Pat , get out of that creek ! ! You too , Sean ! ! Elena , you'll get mud all over your dress '' ! ! Even as she called to the children , Conchita let her gaze seek Tom Brannon . Tomas , she called him -- as the Mexican hands did . He was in earnest conversation with her father and the old vaquero , Luis Hernandez . Whatever they are talking about ? ? Conchita wondered . It bothered her that she probably would never know . Certainly , she wouldn't dare ask her father afterward . He would tell her not to pry into grownups' affairs -- as though she were a little kid like Elena ! ! At the moment , the three men were not saying much of anything . They were sitting on their heels , rider-fashion , over by the still empty calf wagon . Brannon was hunkered down with his broad back to the left rear wheel , with the other two facing him . He held a cigarette in his right hand . It was burning away , forgotten . His face was clouded with unhappiness . He'd told Hank Maguire and Luis Hernandez about his wife's refusal to come with him and about what he now intended to do . They were considering it gravely , neither seeming to like what he planned . Finally Hernandez said , `` I could offer you advice , Tomas , but you wouldn't heed it '' . `` Let's hear it , anyway '' . `` Wait a little while . Let Senora Brannon live in her father's house for a time . Give her time to miss you . Maybe she will then come to you . After all , you want the senora as much as you want the boy . You need her even more than you need him '' . `` She won't change her mind '' , Brannon said . `` John Clayton will see to that '' . `` But after a time away from you . '' `` A year , Luis ? ? Five ? ? Ten ? ? How long should I wait '' ? ? `` Maybe in a year , Tomas . '' `` In a year she'll like living in Clayton's house too much to come back to me '' , Brannon said flatly . `` And the boy will be too much under his influence by then . I've got to take Danny away from Clayton before I lose him altogether . Hell , in a year or five or ten , the boy will have forgotten me -- his own father '' ! ! `` But to take him and leave his mother behind is not good '' . `` In my place , you'd follow such advice as you give me '' ? ? Hernandez looked suddenly uncertain . `` That I can't answer , for I can't imagine something like this happening to me . Maybe I should withdraw my advice -- no '' ? ? Brannon looked at Hank Maguire . `` And you ? ? What would you do in my place '' ? ? Hank shook his head . `` I don't know , Tom . Like Luis , I can't see something like this happening to me . With Maria and me , there's never any problem . Where I go , she goes -- and the kids with us . You're going to need your woman . And the boy will need his mother . If you take the one , you'd better take both '' . Brannon shook his head . `` I won't force Beth to come against her will . But I'm going to have my son '' . They were silent for a little while , each looking glum . Finally Luis Hernandez said , `` What must be , must be . I am with you , of course , Tomas '' . And Hank Maguire added , `` So am I , Tom '' . `` All right '' , Brannon said , rising . `` We'll ride out as soon as we've had chuck '' . Brannon timed it so that they rode in an hour after nightfall . They had for cover both darkness and a summer storm . During much of the fifteen-mile ride they had watched a lurid display of lightning in the sky to the east . Later , they'd heard the rumble of thunder and then , just outside Rockfork , they ran into rain . Those who had slickers donned them . The others put on old coats or ducking jackets , whichever they carried behind their saddle cantles . There were seven of them , enough for a show of strength -- to run a bluff . It was to be nothing more than that . There was to be no gunplay . If the bluff failed and they ran into trouble , Brannon had told the others , they would withdraw -- and he would come after his son another time . He didn't want to put himself outside the law . With him were Hank Maguire , Luis Hernandez , and Luis's son Pedro . The Ramirez brothers were also along . The seventh man was Red Hogan , a wiry little puncher with a wild streak and a liking for hell-raising . They were all good men . It was dark early , because of the storm . Also because of the storm , the streets of Rockfork were deserted . Lighted windows glowed jewel-bright through the downpour . They reined in before the town marshal's office , a box-sized building on Main Street . A lamp burned inside , but Brannon , peering through the window , saw that the office was empty . He'd hoped to catch Jesse Macklin there . `` Probably just stepped out '' , he said . `` Maybe to have supper . Red , come along . The rest of you wait here '' . With Red Hogan , he rode to the Welcome Cafe . Hogan got down from the saddle and had a look inside . `` Not there '' , he said , getting back onto his horse . `` Maybe he's at the hotel '' . They rode to the Rockfork House , a little farther along the opposite side of the street . They reined in there , Brannon remaining in the saddle while Hogan went to look for Jesse Macklin in the hotel dining room . Brannon had no slicker . He'd put on his old brown corduroy coat and it was already soaked . But he felt no physical discomfort . He was only vaguely aware of the sluicing rain . He hardly noticed the blue-green flashes of lightning and the hard claps of thunder . Hogan reappeared , stopped on the hotel porch , lifted a hand in signal . Brannon dismounted and climbed the steps . `` He's finished eating '' , Hogan said . `` Sitting with a cup of coffee now . It shouldn't be long '' . It seemed long , at least to Tom Brannon . He and Hogan waited by the door , one to either side . Macklin was the third man to come out , and he came unhurriedly . He was puffing on a cigar , and he was turning up his coat collar against the rain . It was not until he moved across the porch that he became aware of them , and then it was too late . They closed in fast , kept him from reaching inside his coat for his gun . `` Just come along '' , Brannon told him . `` Don't start anything you can't finish '' . `` Now , listen '' -- Macklin began . `` We'll talk over at your office '' . `` Brannon , I warn you '' ! ! `` Let's go , Marshal '' , Brannon said , and took him by the arm . Hogan gripped the lawman's other arm . They escorted him down from the porch and through the rain to his office . The other five Slash-B men followed them inside , crowding the small room . His face was stiff with anger when they let go of his arms . He looked at each of them in turn , Brannon last of all . `` I'll remember you '' , he said . `` Every last one of you . As for you , Brannon '' -- `` Put your gun on the desk , Marshal '' . `` Now , hold on , damn it ; ; I won't '' -- Red Hogan's patience ran out . He lifted the skirt of Macklin's coat , took his gun from its holster , tossed it onto the desk . `` Too much fooling around '' , he said . `` Don't press your luck , badge-toter '' . Brannon said , `` Now the key to the lockup , Marshal '' . `` Key '' ? ? Macklin said . `` What for '' ? ? `` Can't you guess '' ? ? Brannon said . `` We're putting you where you won't come to harm . Come on -- the key . Get it out '' ! ! `` Damned if I will . Brannon , you've assaulted a law officer and '' -- They moved in on him , crowded him from all sides . No man laid a hand on him , but the threat of violence was there . His face took on a sudden pallor , became beaded with sweat , and he seemed to have trouble with his breathing . He held out a moment longer , then his nerve gave under the pressure . He swore , and said , `` All right . It's here in my pocket '' . `` Get it out '' , Brannon ordered . Then , as Macklin obeyed : `` Now let's go out back '' . Resignedly , Macklin turned to the back door . They followed him into the rain and across to the squat stone building fifty feet to the rear . The door of the lockup was of oak planks and banded with strap iron . It was secured by an oversized padlock . Macklin balked again , not wanting to unlock and open the door . They crowded him in that threatening way once more , forced him to give in . Once the door was open , they crowded him inside the dark building . He was uttering threats in a low but savage voice when they closed and padlocked the door . They returned to the street , mounted their horses , rode through the rain to the big house on Houston Street . Its windows glowed with lamplight . Deputy Marshal Luke Harper still stood guard on the veranda , a forlorn , scarecrowish figure in the murky dark . He came to the edge of the veranda , peered down at them with his hand on his gun . `` Don't try it '' , Brannon told him , dismounting and starting up the steps with his men following . `` Don't get yourself killed for something that doesn't concern you '' . He strode past the now frightened man , entered the house . Miguel and Arturo Ramirez remained on the veranda to keep Harper from interfering . The others followed Brannon inside . They trailed him across the wide hallway to the parlor , four roughly garbed and tough-looking men who probably had never before ventured into such a house . They brought to it all the odors that clung to men like themselves , that of their own sweat , of campfire smoke , of horses and cattle . They tracked mud on the oaken floor , on the carpet . Their presence fouled the elegance of that room . And their arrival caught John Clayton and Charles Ansley off guard . The author of the anonymous notes seemed to be all-knowing . For men who had left cattle alone after getting their first notices had received no second . But the day of the deadline came and passed , and the men who had scoffed at the warnings laughed with satisfaction . For , with a single exception , nothing had happened to them . The exception was an Iron Mountain settler named William Lewis . After walking out to his corral that morning , he'd been amazed to see the dust puff up in front of his feet . A split second later , the distant crack of a rifle had sounded . He'd mounted up immediately and raced with a revolver ready toward the spot from which he'd estimated the shot had come . But he had found all of the thickets and points of cover deserted . There had been no sign of a rifleman and no track or trace to show that anyone had been near . Lewis was a man who had made a full-time job of cow stealing . He hadn't even pretended to be farming his spread . His land had never been plowed . He had done his rustling openly and boasted about it . He had received both first and second anonymous notices , and each time he had accused his neighbors of writing them . He had cursed at them and threatened them . He was a man , those neighbors testified later , who didn't have a friend in the world . William Lewis made the rounds of all who lived near him again , that August morning after a bullet landed at his feet , and once more he accused and threatened everyone . `` I'll be ready next time '' ! ! He raged . `` I'll be shootin' right back '' . He had his chance the very next morning , for exactly the same thing happened again . This time Lewis had his own rifle in his hands , and he threw some answering fire back at the mysterious far-off shot , then spent most of the day searching out the area . He found nothing , but he still refused to give up and move out . `` Just let me meet up with that damned bushwhackin' coward face-to-face '' ! ! He exploded . `` That's all I ask '' ! ! He never got that chance . For the unseen , ghostlike rifleman aimed a little higher the third time . A bullet smashed directly into the center of William Lewis' chest . He slumped against a log fence rail , then tried to lift himself . Two more shots followed in quick succession , dropping him limp and huddled on the ground . An inquest was held , and after a good deal of testimony about the anonymous notes , the county coroner estimated that the shooting had been done from a distance of 300 yards . Rumors of the offer Tom Horn had made at the Stockgrowers' Association meeting had leaked out by then , and as a grand jury investigation of the murder got underway , the prosecuting attorney , a Colonel Baird , ordered that the tall stock detective be summoned for questioning . It took some time to locate Horn . He was finally found in the Bates Hole region of Natrona County , two counties away . Prosecutor Baird immediately assumed he was hiding out there after the shooting and began preparing an indictment . But that indictment was never made . For Tom Horn , it turned out , had a number of rancher and cowboy witnesses ready and willing to swear with straight faces that he had been in Bates Hole the day of the killing . The former scout's alibi couldn't be shaken . The authorities had to release him . He immediately rode on to Cheyenne , threw a ten-day drinking spree and dropped some very strong hints among friends . `` Dead center at three hundred yards , that coroner said '' ! ! He'd grin . `` Three shots in that fella 'fore he hit the ground ! ! You reckon there's two men in this state can shoot like that '' ? ? Publicly , he denied everything . Privately , he created and magnified an image of himself as a hired assassin . For a blood-chilling ring of terror to the very sound of his name was the tool he needed for the job he'd promised to do . Tom Horn was soon back at work , giving his secret employers their money's worth . A good many beef-hungry settlers were accepting the death of William Lewis as proof that the warning notes were not idle threats . The company herds were being raided less often , and cabins and soddies all over the range were standing deserted . But there were other homesteaders who passed the Lewis murder off as a personal grudge killing , the work of one of his neighbors . The rustling problem was by no means solved . Even in the very area where the shooting had been done , cattle were still disappearing . For less than a dozen miles from the unplowed land of the dead man lived another settler who had ignored the warnings that his existence might be foreclosed on -- a blatant and defiant rustler named Fred Powell . `` Fred was mighty crude about the way he took in cattle '' his own hired man , Andy Ross , mentioned later . `` Everyone knew it , but he sort of acted like he didn't care who knew it -- even after them notes came , even after he'd heard about Lewis , even after he'd been shot at a couple o' times hisself '' ! ! On the morning of September 10 , 1895 , Powell and Ross rose at dawn and began their day's work . Haying time was close at hand , and they needed some strong branches to repair a hay rack . Harnessing a team to a buckboard , they drove out to a willow-lined creek about a half-mile off , then climbed down and began chopping . Andy Ross had just started swinging an ax at his second willow when the distant blast of a rifle sounded . He looked around in surprise , then noticed that Fred Powell was clutching his chest . The hired man ran over to help his boss . `` My God , I'm shot '' ! ! Powell gasped . And he collapsed and died instantly . Ross had no intention of searching for the assassin . He heaved the dead man onto the buckboard , yelled and lashed at the team and got out of there fast . But he brought back the sheriff and several deputies , and to the lawmen the entire affair seemed a repetition of the Lewis killing . A detailed scouring of the entire area revealed nothing beyond a ledge of rocks that might have been the rifleman's hiding place . There were no tracks of either hoofs or boots . Not even an empty cartridge case could be found . Once again , Tom Horn was the first and most likely suspect , and he was brought in for questioning immediately . Once again , he shook his head , kept his face expressionless and his voice very calm , and had a strongly supported alibi ready . Later , riding in for some lusty enjoyment of the liquor and professional ladies of Cheyenne , he laid claim to the killing with the vague insinuations he made . `` Exterminatin' cow thieves is just a business proposition with me '' , he'd blandly announce . `` And I sort o' got a corner on the market '' . `` Tom '' , a friend asked him once , `` how come you bushwhacked them rustlers ? ? They wouldn't o' stood no chance with you in a plain , straight-out shoot-down '' . He had lots of friends , then as always . Even as he became widely known as a professional killer , nearly every cowboy and rancher in Wyoming seemed proud to call him a friend . No man's name brought more cheers when it was announced in a rodeo . `` Well '' , he explained , `` s'posin' you was a nester swingin' the long rope ? ? Which would you be most scairt of -- a dry-gulchin' or a shoot-down '' ? ? `` Yeah , I can see that '' , the friend was forced to agree . `` But well , it just don't seem sportin' somehow '' ! ! `` Sportin' '' ! ! The tall sunburnt rustler-hunter stared in amazement . `` Sportin' '' ! ! He echoed again in soft wonder . `` I seen a lot o' things in my time . I found a trooper once the Apache had spread-eagled on an ant hill , and another time we ran across some teamsters they'd caught , tied upside down on their own wagon wheels over little fires until their brains was exploded right out o' their skulls . I heard o' Texas cattlemen wrappin' a cow thief up in green hides and lettin' the sun shrink 'em and squeeze him to death . But there's one thing I never seen or heard of , one thing I just don't think there is , and that's a sportin' way o' killin' a man '' ! ! After the first two murders , the warning notes were rarely ignored . The lesson had been learned . The examples were plain . When Fred Powell's brother-in-law , Charlie Keane , moved into the dead man's home , the anonymous letter writer took no chances on Charlie taking up where Fred had left off and wasted no time on a first notice : If you don't leave this country within 3 days , your life will be taken the same as Powell's was . This was the message found tacked to the cabin door . Keane left , within three days . All through Albany and Laramie counties , other men were doing the same . Houses of settlers who'd treated the company herds as a natural resource , free for the taking , were sitting empty , with weeds growing high in their yards . The small half-heartedly tended fields of men who'd spent more time rustling cattle than farming were lying fallow . No cow thief could count on a jury of his sympathetic peers to free him any longer . Jury , judge and executioner were riding the range in the form of a single unknown figure that could materialize anywhere , at any time , to dispense an ancient brand of justice the men of the new West had believed long outdated . For three straight years , Tom Horn patrolled the southern Wyoming pastures , and how many men he killed after Lewis and Powell ( if he killed Lewis and Powell ) will never be known . It is possible , although highly doubtful , that he killed none at all but merely let his reputation work for him by privately claiming every unsolved murder in the state . It is also possible , but equally doubtful , that he actually shot down the hundreds of men with which his legend credits him . For that legend was growing explosively , Rumor was insisting he received a price of $600 a man . ( The best evidence is that he received a monthly wage of about $125 , very good money in an era when top hands worked for $30 and found . ) Rumor had it he slipped two small rocks under each victim's head as a sort of trademark . ( A detailed search of old coroner's reports fails to substantiate this in the slightest . ) One thing was certain -- his method was effective , so effective that after a time even the warning notices were often unnecessary . The mere fact that the tall figure with the rifle and field glasses had been seen riding that way was enough to frighten three rustling homesteaders out of the Upper Laramie country in a single week . `` My reputation's my stock in trade '' , Tom mentioned more than once . He evidently couldn't foresee that it might be his downfall in the end . He had made himself the personification of the Devil to the homesteaders . But to the cattlemen who had been facing bankruptcy from rustling losses and to the cowboys who had been faced with lay-offs a few years earlier , he was becoming a vastly different type of legendary figure . Such ranchers as Coble and Clay and the Bosler brothers carried him on their books as a cowhand even while he was receiving a much larger salary from parties unknown . He made their spreads his headquarters , and he helped out in their roundups . In the cow camps , Tom Horn was regarded as a hero , as the same kind of champion he was when he entered and invariably won the local rodeos . The hands and their bosses saw him as a lone knight of the range , waging a dedicated crusade against a lawless new society that was threatening a beloved way of life . The wailing , guitar-strumming minstrels of the cattle kingdom made up songs about him . By 1898 , rustling losses had been driven down to the lowest level ever seen in Wyoming . When several minutes had passed and Curt hadn't emerged from the livery stable , Brenner reentered the hotel and faced Summers across the counter . `` I have a little job for you , Charlie . I'm sure you won't mind doing me a small favor '' . Brenner's voice was oily , but Summers wasn't fooled . He moistened his lips uneasily . `` What is it you want me to do , Mr. Brenner '' ? ? Brenner shrugged carelessly . `` It's very simple . I just want you to take a message to Diane Molinari . Tell her to come here to the hotel '' . Vastly relieved , Summers nodded and started toward the door . `` One thing , Summers '' , Brenner said . `` You're not to mention my name . Tell her Curt Adams wants to see her '' . Summers pulled up short , and turned around . `` I don't know , Mr. Brenner '' , he said haltingly , beginning to get an inkling of Brenner's plans . `` It doesn't seem quite right , telling her a thing like that . Couldn't I just '' -- His voice trailed off into silence . Brenner continued to smile , but his eyes were cold . He turned and looked around at the lobby as though seeing things he hadn't before noticed . `` You know , Summers '' , he said thoughtfully . `` Eagle's Nest ought to have a fire company . If someone were to drop a match in here , this place would go up like a haystack '' . He started toward the stairway , then turned to add , `` Tell her to come to Adams's room , that Adams is in trouble . Tell her to hurry '' . `` Yes sir '' . His face pale , Summers headed for the street . Curt's visit to the livery stable had been merely a precaution in case anyone should be watching . He paused only long enough to ascertain that Jess's buckskin was still missing and that his own gray was all right , then climbed through a back window and dropped to the ground outside . The fact that Jess's horse had not been returned to its stall could indicate that Diane's information had been wrong , but Curt didn't interpret it this way . A man like Jess would want to have a ready means of escape in case it was needed . Probably his horse would be close to where he was hiding . From the back of the barn it was a simple matter to reach Black's house without using the street . Curt approached the place cautiously , and watched it several minutes from the protection of a grove of trees . There was a light in Black's front room , but drawn curtains prevented any view of the interior . Curt circled the house and located a barn out back . He could hear horses moving around inside , and nothing else . There was no lock on the door , only an iron hook which he unfastened . He opened the door and went in , pulling it shut behind him . Again he stood in the darkness listening , but there was only the scrape of a shod hoof on a plank floor . He moved ahead carefully , his left hand in front of him , and came to a wooden partition . Horse smell was very strong , and he could hear the crunch of grain being ground between strong jaws . He found a match in his pocket and lit it . There were two horses in the barn , a sway-backed dun and Jess Crouch's buckskin . Curt snuffed out the match . It was certain now that Jess was in the house , but also , presumably , was Stacey Black . Curt wanted to get Jess alone , without interference from anyone , even as spineless a person as the store owner . He studied the problem for a few seconds and thought of a means by which it might be solved . Reaching across the side of the stall , he slapped the buckskin on the rump . The startled animal let out a terrified squeal and thrashed around in the stall . As Curt had hoped , the house door banged open . He slapped the buckskin again and it kicked wildly , its hoofs rattling the side of the stall . Curt moved over beside the door and waited . Presently he heard footsteps crossing the yard , and Jess's smothered curses . The door swung open , and Jess said sourly , `` What the hell's the matter with you ? ? '' The horse continued to snort . Curt doubted that any animal belonging to Jess would find much reassurance in its owner's voice . Jess cursed again , and entered the barn . A match flared , and he reached above his head to light a lantern which hung from a wire loop . As he crossed to the side of the stall , Curt drew his gun and clicked back the hammer . `` Before you try anything '' , he said . `` Remember what happened to Gruller '' . Jess caught his breath in surprise . He started to reach for his gun , but apparently thought better of it . `` That's the stuff '' , Curt said . `` Just hold it that way '' . He reached out to pull the door shut and fasten it with a sliding bolt . `` You and I have a little talking to do , Jess . You won't be needing this '' . He moved up and lifted Jess's pistol out of its holster . `` Damn you , Adams '' -- Jess was beginning to recover from his initial shock . `` We ain't got nothing to talk about . If I don't come back in the house , Breed's going to '' -- `` Your trigger-happy brother isn't in the house . About now he's probably having supper . That long ride the four of you took must've given him a good appetite . Now turn around so I can see your face '' . Jess turned . There was raw fury in his eyes , and the veins of his neck were swollen . `` You're about as dumb as they come , Adams . I don't know what you're up to , but when Brenner '' -- `` You can forget about Brenner , too '' , Curt said . `` It's Ben Arbuckle we're going to talk about '' . `` Arbuckle '' ? ? Jess stiffened . `` I don't know nothin' about him '' . `` No ? ? I suppose you don't know anything about a piece of two-by-four , either ; ; one with blood all over it , Arbuckle's blood '' . Curt's fingers put a little more pressure on the trigger of his gun . `` So help me , Crouch , I'd like to kill you where you stand , but , before I do , I'm going to hear you admit killing him . Now start talking . Who told you to do it ? ? Was it Dutch Brenner '' ? ? Curt was holding Jess's gun in his left hand . He drew back his arm to slash the gunbarrel across Jess's face , but didn't finish the motion . Pistol-whipping an unarmed man might come easy to someone like Jess , but Curt couldn't bring himself to do it . Apparently sensing this , and realizing that it gave him an advantage , Jess became bold . `` Having all the guns makes you a big man , don't it , Adams ? ? If we was both armed , you wouldn't talk so tough '' . `` No '' ? ? Curt reached out and dropped Jess's pistol back into the holster . He retreated a step and holstered his own . `` All right , Crouch ; ; we're on even terms . Now draw '' ! ! Sweat bubbled out on Jess's swarthy face . The fingers of his right hand twisted into a claw , but he didn't reach for the gun . Curt , angry enough to be a little reckless , raised his hands shoulder high . `` Does this make it any easier , coward '' ? ? `` I ain't drawin' against you '' , Jess said thickly . `` I heard how you outdrew Chico . I ain't a gunslinger '' . `` No . You're the kind of bastard who sneaks up on a man from behind and hits him with a club . I just wanted to hear you say so '' . Jess stared at him without answering and let his hands fall to his sides . He had found Curt's weakness , or what to Jess was a weakness , and was smart enough to take advantage of it . Somewhere in the distance , a woman screamed . Curt was too involved in his own problems to pay much attention . He had to make Jess talk , and he had to do it before Stacey Black got curious and came to investigate . Once more he lifted Jess's gun from its holster , only this time he tossed it into the stall with the frightened buckskin . He dropped his own beside it . `` We'll do it another way , then '' , he said harshly . Jess's coarse features twisted in a surprised grin which was smashed out of shape by Curt's fist . With a roar of pain and fury Jess made his attack . Curt managed to duck beneath the man's flailing fist , and drove home a solid left to Jess's mid-section . It was like hitting a sack of salt . Pain shot up Curt's arm clear to the shoulder , but Jess seemed hardly aware that he had been hit . He slammed into the wall , bounced back , and caught Curt with a roundhouse right which sent him spinning . An inch lower and it would have knocked him out . As it was , his vision blurred and for a moment he was unable to move . When his eyes began to focus , he saw Jess charging at him with a pitchfork . Curt twisted to one side , and the tines of the fork bit into the floor . Jess wasted a few seconds trying to yank them loose . It gave Curt time to stagger to his feet . The tines broke off under Jess's twisting , and he swung the handle in an attempt to knock Curt's brains out . His aim was hurried ; ; so the pitchfork whistled over Curt's head . By now Curt was seeing clearly again . He stepped inside Jess's guard and landed two blows to the big man's belly , putting everything he had behind them . They made Jess double over . When his head came down , Curt grabbed him by the hair and catapulted him head first into the wall . The building shook , setting the lantern to swaying , and the buckskin to pitching again . Even Black's old crowbait began to snort , and from the house Black yelled , `` Jess ! ! What's going on out there '' ? ? Jess didn't seem too sure himself . He lurched drunkenly to his feet , lowered his head , and took one step away from the wall . Curt caught him flush on the nose with a blow which started at the floor . Jess had had enough . Blood gushed from his nose , and he backed off as rapidly as he could , stumbling over his own feet in his frantic haste to get away from Curt's fists . Curt was in almost as bad shape , but he wouldn't quit . He backed Jess into a corner , grabbed a handful of the man's shirtfront , and drew back his right fist . `` Tell me about Arbuckle ! ! You killed him , didn't you '' ? ? `` It was Brenner's idea '' , Jess mumbled , dabbing at his nose . `` He found out about you and Arbuckle talking . He wanted to show the town what happened to anyone who tried to start trouble '' . `` You mean anyone who stood up for his rights '' , Curt said . He let go of the shirt , and Jess slumped to the floor . Turning his back , Curt crossed to the stall , reached over to untie the buckskin's halter rope , and waved his hand in the animal's face . The buckskin bolted out of the stall . Curt moved in and picked up his gun . He shook loose straw out of the action , and placed the gun in his holster . Leaving Jess's where it lay , he left the stall . `` Get up , Crouch . We're going someplace '' . Jess painfully got to his feet as someone rattled the door . `` Who's in there '' ? ? Black called fearfully . Curt opened the door , grabbed Black by the shoulder , and pulled him into the barn . `` You're staying right here for a while . This dirty coward just admitted killing Arbuckle . I'm going to let him tell it to somebody else '' . He shoved Black toward the stall , and pointed his pistol at Jess . `` Get out of here . You're coming along peacefully , or I'll put a bullet in your leg '' . Jess stumbled through the door . Curt followed , reaching behind him to shut the door and hook it . Black would have little trouble getting out , but it might delay him a few minutes . `` Where're you takin' me '' ? ? Jess asked worriedly . `` We're going to Marshal Woods's house . Maybe if the marshal hears this himself , it'll make a difference . Somebody in this town must still have some backbone '' . Over his shoulder he could see Max's loose grin and the Burnsides' glowering faces . `` Honey '' , he whispered . `` Soon as we send them on their way and make camp , let's you and me go for a walk down by the Snake -- all by ourselves '' . `` Sally '' , admonished her mother , `` you've got all evening to visit with Dan . His wounds need dressing now '' . Mrs. Jackson's words recalled Dan to his lack of fitness for courting . What a spectacle he was , caked with dirt and sweat and blood , filthy as a pig and naked as an Indian , kissing the finest , the sweetest , the bravest , and absolutely the prettiest girl in this whole wonderful world . He released her reluctantly for her enthusiastic reunion with Old Hap . `` Got a lot to tend to , but I'll get back quick as I can '' , he assured her . Dan could hear Clayton Burnside and Eben Jackson summing up their final reckoning for rental on the oxen . Jackson was doing most of the talking . So long as Sally's pa was coming out best on the haggle , Dan didn't feel the need of putting in his two-bits' worth . Soon as the Burnsides moved on , he'd lead Rex down by the river ; ; there he could shave and scrub himself up for the evening . Damn it , he thought bitterly , picking up his shirt and staring at the fresh bullet hole in the sleeve . If I hadn't got Nate stopped when I did , my duds'd all be shot plumb to hell ! ! He stooped , picked up his ruined hat , and pursed his lips thoughtfully . From the way the wound in his head was itching , Dan knew that it would heal . But his only hat was something else again . `` Nate ! ! Nate '' ! ! He shouted . The Burnsides , now ready to roll , were purposefully deaf to his cry . `` Nate '' ! ! He bellowed to the retreating back directly in front of him . `` I ain't going to fight you no more '' . Nate turned his head , attempting to speak in a soothing voice . `` I know you ain't '' ! ! Dan affirmed , feeling ten feet tall . He moved in close , jerked the handsome , broad-brimmed beaver hat from Nate's head and clamped it on his own . `` Here's a present for you '' , he said , shoving his bullet-riddled hat down over Nate's purpling forehead . `` Me and you's trading hats so's you'll have something permanent to remember me by '' ! ! Sally left her choring to stand beside Dan . Slipping her hand in his , they silently watched the Burnsides make the bend in the road and disappear from sight . Much as they had to look forward to , they didn't begrudge a moment of the time they spent seeing them go . At first Matilda could not believe her own eyes . She had spent too many hours looking ahead , hoping and longing to catch even a glimpse of Dan and finding nothing but emptiness . And now she could see him , looking uncommon handsome , standing there beside Sally Jackson and her folks in front of their trail-worn wagon . Seeing them waiting there at the foot of Emigrant Rock was so overwhelming that , for a good minute after they rounded the bend and started down the grade leading toward them , Matilda could not speak at all . Then , with a glory that almost wiped out the deep , downward sags in her careworn face , Matilda leaned over the wheel and shouted to Hez , who was stumbling along in the heat and the dust on the opposite side of the wagon `` Pa ! ! Pa ! ! I can see Dan . And he's with the Jacksons '' ! ! `` What about Burnsides '' ? ? Hez asked , who still believed they'd have them to lick . `` They ain't even in sight '' ! ! She replied . By then Hez could see for himself , and so could the others . Soon they were all shouting greetings , exchanging smiles , and rejoicing to think that they were all back together again . But even a reunion as joyous as this one did not make a break in the routines of the day . Nor could they stop and find out about all that had happened until they made circle , tended the cattle , tethered the horses , gathered fuel , carried water , and started their cooking fires . Then , and only then , with the Jacksons and Dan as their true guests of honor , did the Harrows take time to catch up on the news . No sooner did they hear of Dan's injury than both Gran and Matilda went into immediate action . The wound in his scalp was examined , pronounced healing , and well doctored with simples , before they dished up the victuals . From then on , in keeping with the traditions they had followed since childhood , the whole group settled down to relish their food . Even Sally , in spite of her gaiety and obvious welcome , followed the old taboo of `` quitting the gab when wearing the nosebag '' . After their supper , the evening turned into a regular `` Hoe-Down '' . Only , they carefully substituted old country folk dances for the Virginia Reels and square dances that were so popular among more worldly trains in the great westward migration . But with Bill O'Connor on the fiddle , and Gran Harrow exuberantly shouting `` Glory Be '' and `` Hallelujah '' above their united chant of the lilting old ballads , they played their quaint folk games with all the fervor and abandon of a real celebration . `` Golly '' , Rod exclaimed to Harmony as he dutifully stood by her side among the ringed spectators , `` don't that fiddle make you wish the Bible didn't say us Baptists can't dance '' ? ? `` Nor Methodists , neither '' , she replied . `` Not that it matters to me , being this far along '' . Rod gave her a warm pat on the shoulder before he replied . `` Come spring , you'll be kicking up your heels and feeling coltish again too , gal '' . At these words of sympathy and understanding , Harmony said generously , `` I don't mind setting here along with Gran while you go out and join in the games '' . Rod shifted his eager eyes from the milling group out in the circle long enough to reply , `` I ain't much of a hand for Dare-Base and Farmer-in-the-Dell , but I'd sure like to get in on the handhold and wrestles '' . He looked down at his big hands and slowly flexed his long fingers . `` Don't reckon there's nobody out there , 'cept maybe Dan , who can outgrip me , Harmony '' . With Rod on his way and Matilda visiting with Mrs. Jackson while they searched out familiar names on the face of the cliff , Harmony settled on the edge of the grub box , to ease the pressure of her swollen body on her bone-weary legs , and worried about all that might have happened to Sally . And she was deeply thankful that she could see her now , out there in the midst of a gay , youthful circle , skipping and singing , `` Farmer in the dell , Farmer in the dell , Heigh-ho the dairy-oh , the farmer in the dell '' . At the sight of Sally's happy face and carefree expression , Harmony's dark , brooding eyes quickly brightened with unshed tears . She was glad , completely and unselfishly glad , to see that things were working out the right way for both Sally and Dan . And she really tried to go a step further and say she hoped they'd be just as right as they now were for her and for Rod . But she couldn't , not yet . Not with the memory of her folks and the lost Conestoga still holding her close . Out in the center of the circle the farmer , who was Dan , wasted no time when they came to the line , `` The farmer choose his wife '' . With a swift swoop of his big arms , he grabbed Sally out of the circle surrounding him , and then kissed her soundly before setting her down so she could stand by his side while they jointly chose the rest of their `` outfit '' . Soon the child , the dog , the cat and even the cheese , all joined them out there in the circle . By now Harmony could see that most of the adults in the train were winded and resting , or else siphoned off from the games by the challenging lure of the great cliff towering above them . No matter how many registry rocks they came to on this journey , each one exerted its own appeal . Even strange names seemed to make them feel closer to some kind of civilization when stumbled across out here in this wilderness . Already a few hardy folk from their own train were zealously chipping away at the register rocks , leaving their own records along with those made by the earlier trains . Soon she saw Rod and Hez moving over to join them . No sooner were they through and the guards posted , than the whole camp turned in for a night of sound sleep . For Matilda , it was the first she had known in many a night . Even the knowledge that she was losing another boy , as a mother always does when a marriage is made , did not prevent her from having the first carefree , dreamless sleep that she had known since they dropped down the canyon and into Bear Valley , way , way back there when they were crossing those other mountains . Next morning , they moved on again . `` My souls' a-gracious '' ! ! Gran Harrow exclaimed , watching their rippling muscles as Rod and Dan swung her up into the load . `` A body would swear I floated right up here on a cloud '' ! ! Rod and Dan released their holds on the arms of her hickory rocker and exchanged embarrassed grins . `` Shucks , Gran '' , they said almost in unison . `` That wasn't nothing at all '' ! ! Leaning forward in her chair , Gran nearsightedly scrutinized Dan's face . `` How's Sally like rubbin' agin that thar little ticklebrush ye're a-raising '' ? ? `` Quit ragging him , Gran '' , Rod protested . `` I ain't ragging him '' ! ! Gran peered again at the week-old blond mustache shadowing Dan's upper lip . `` But honest-to-Betsy , I've seed more hair than that on a piece o' bacon '' . The two tall brothers waited silently while their mother handed Gran her cold snack and water jug , placed the chamber pot beside her feet , and returned to her place at the front of the wagon with Alice . `` Rheumatics worse , Pa '' ? ? Dan asked Hez , who had limped back from his team to hold the notched-stick chair braces in place while his boys swung up the tailgate and tied it tight at the ends . `` My right leg's stiff as a board this morning '' , he replied . `` But the sun'll fry it out'n me onct we git to rolling '' . The three men stepped out to the side to wait for Captain Clemens' signal . Hez looked up at the high face of Emigrant Rock , official signboard for the Raft River turnoff , and gloated , `` Seems funny that them Burnsides never took time to leave their John-Henry up thar '' . `` Wonder what made them hurry so '' , Rod drawled , giving Dan a sly wink . Dan grinned , and changed the subject . `` From now on , Sally and me and her folks aim to give you our turn when it comes up and fall in behind you and Rod's outfit '' . `` Ain't no sense you eating our dust '' , Rod protested . `` Sally and her ma want to trade off on account of Harmony being so far along '' , Dan explained . `` Jackson recruited his critters , and him and me fixed up his wagon while we was waiting for you to catch up . He's got the tightest running gear in the train now . Besides , 'tain't no more'n right for me to follow with my black oxen , so's I can unhook and pull up fast if either of you get in a pinch '' . Captain Clemens' signal shot sent the men hurrying to their waiting teams . `` Reckon ye're right , Dan '' , Hez called back over his shoulder . `` I'll shore be needing ye both on the pull out o' the canyon '' . Rod looked apprehensively ahead at the narrowing , precipice-walled gorge . `` We'll double teams zigzagging up the mountain , Harmony '' , he spoke reassuringly , concerned by the pinched look around her mouth . `` Like enough we'll all be up on top by sundown '' . Out of the corner of his eye , he could see his father's wheels beginning to turn . Before Harmony had a chance to reply , Rod cracked his long whip over his thin oxen's backs . While no larger than Dutch Springs , this mining supply town had the appearance of being far busier and more prosperous . Men crowded the streets and freight rigs and teams were moving about . Although they were forced to maintain a sharper watch , this activity enabled them to ride in and rack their broncs without any particular attention being paid them . `` Gyp'll be holdin' forth in some bar if he's here at all '' , Cobb declared , glancing along the street as they stretched their legs . There were no less than six or seven saloons in Ganado , not counting the lower class dives , all vying for the trade of celebrating miners and teamsters . Pat only nodded . `` Take one side of the street , and I'll take the other '' , he proposed . `` If you spot Carmer give a yell before you move in '' . Cobb's assent was tight . `` You do the same . It's all I ask , Stevens '' . Separating , they took different sides of the main drag and systematically combed the bars . Russ visited two places without result and his blood pressure was down to zero . Suddenly it seemed to him insane that they might hope to locate Gyp Carmer so casually , even were he to prove the thief . He tramped out of the Miners Rest with his hopes plummeting , and headed doggedly for the Palace Saloon , the last place of any consequence on this side of the street . The Palace was an elaborate establishment , built practically on stilts in front , with long flights of wooden steps running up to the porch . Behind its ornate facade the notorious dive clung like a bird's nest to the rocky ribs of the canyonside . Russ ran up the steps quickly to the plank porch . The front windows of the place were long and narrow , reaching nearly to the floor and affording an unusually good view of the interior . Heading for the batwings , Cobb glanced perfunctorily through the nearest window , and suddenly dodged aside . Nerves tight as a bowstring , he paused to gather his wits . Against all expectation , Carmer was inside , clearly enjoying himself to the hilt and already so tipsy that it seemed unlikely he was bothering to note anything or anyone about him . Fierce anger surged through Russ . He fought down the impulse to rush in and collar the vicious puncher on the spot . Reaching the porch rail beyond view of the bar windows , he feverishly scanned the busy street below . Stevens was nowhere in sight . Muffling an exclamation , Russ sprang to the nearest steps and ran down . As luck had it , he had not gone twenty feet in the street before Pat appeared . `` What luck , Cobb '' ? ? He said swiftly . Russ pointed upward . `` He's there '' , he got out tersely , curbing his rising excitement . Hitching his cartridge belt around , Pat glanced upward briefly at the Palace and started that way with Cobb at his side . Climbing the steps steadily , they reached the top and headed for the door . Pat pushed through first . Forced behind him momentarily , Russ followed at once and halted two steps inside . His eyes widened . While five minutes ago the place had presented a scene of easy revelry , with Gyp Carmer a prominent figure , it was now as somnolent and dull as the day before payday . Carmer himself was nowhere to be seen . A man knocked the roulette ball about idly in its track , and another dozed at one of the card tables . Two men murmured with their heads together at the end of the bar , while the sleek-headed bartender absently polished a glass . Looking the setup over , Stevens started coolly for the rear of the place . `` Where yuh goin' '' ? ? It was the barkeep . Halting , Pat turned to survey him deliberately . He did not reply , going on toward the back . Less assured than the tall , wide-shouldered man in the lead , Cobb followed alertly , a hand on his gun butt . The bartender measured this situation with heavy eyes and decided he wanted no part of it . He said no more . A hall opened in back of the bar , running toward an ell . Pat moved into it . Small rooms , probably for cards , opened off on either side . All the doors were open at this hour except one , and it was toward this that Stevens made his way with Russ close at his shoulder . The door was locked . A single kick made it spring open , shuddering . Pat saw Gyp Carmer staggering forward , a half-filled bottle upraised as if to strike . Russ sprang through to bat it nimbly aside . With a bellow Carmer lunged at him . But he was more than half-drunk , and his faculties were dulled . Cobb unleashed a single powerful jab that sent Gyp reeling wildly and crashing down with a whining groan . He started to struggle up , heaving desperately . Russ gave him a brutal thrust that tumbled him over flat on his stomach . Kneeling , Cobb planted a sturdy knee in the small of his back , holding him pinned . `` Okay , Stevens . I've drawn his fangs '' , he snapped . `` Go through his pockets , will you ? ? If we have to we'll take him apart and see what he's made of '' ! ! Complying methodically , Pat pulled pocket after pocket inside out without finding a thing . Cobb watched this with hunted eyes , his desperate hope waning by the moment . Stevens was grunting over the last empty pocket when Russ abruptly rose and lunged toward Carmer's hat , which had tumbled half-a-dozen feet away when he first fell . Cobb got it . Straightening up , his eyes ablaze , he held out the battered Stetson . `` Look at this '' ! ! Inside the crown , stuffed behind the stained sweatband , could be seen thin , crumpled wads of currency . Carmer's ingenious cache for his loot had been found . `` By golly , Stevens ! ! You were right '' , Russ exclaimed , tearing the loose bills out of Carmer's hat . `` That is , if we can be sure this is Colcord's money '' -- Pat grunted . `` Where else would he get it ? ? Count what you've got there , Cobb . We can soon tell '' . Russ ran through the bills and named an amount it was highly unlikely any cowpuncher would come by honestly . Pat nodded . `` It's within a hundred of what Crip had '' , he declared . `` We know Penny spent some -- and Carmer must have dropped a few dollars getting that load on '' . Handing the money over , Russ wiped his hands on his pants-legs as if ridding himself of something unclean . His glance at Gyp Carmer was disdainful . `` Shall we get out of here '' ? ? Leaving the card room , they moved back through the Palace the way they had come . Glowering looks met them in the bar , but there was no attempt to halt them . Pausing in the outside door to glance behind him , Pat looked his unspoken warning and stepped out . He and Cobb clattered down the high steps to the street . Neither spoke till they reached their horses . Pat paused there , looking across at the young fellow . It'll be a pleasure for you to return this money to Colcord and tell him about it , Russ '' . He started to return it . To his faint surprise Russ held up his hand . `` Not me '' , he ruled decidedly . I've had enough . It was you that tracked it down anyway , Stevens '' , he pursued strictly . `` I'll shove along home '' . `` Whatever you say '' . Pat swung into the saddle , yet still he delayed , his brows puckered . `` You owe it to Penny to give her a chance to explain that she was defending you , really '' , he observed mildly . `` Old Crip wasn't '' , retorted Cobb tartly . `` He'll know when you tell him . But I want this to sink in awhile . Then maybe next time he won't be so quick on the trigger '' . `` Pat had never pretended to give advice in such affairs . `` You're the doctor '' , he returned with a smile . `` But I still think Penny's an awful nice girl , Russ '' -- `` You don't have to tell me '' , flashed Cobb . Giving the other a dark look , he hauled his bronc around and trotted down off the street . Pat let him go , following more leisurely . At the first restaurant he sensibly pulled up to go in for his dinner , and as a consequence did not see Cobb strike the open range at the mouth of the canyon and head straight across the swells for Antler . The truth was , the puncher was both bewildered and dismayed by his own mixed luck . `` Penny's always glad to see me over there '' , he mused bleakly . Yet had he not visited the girl at Saw Buck he would never have been involved in this latest tangle . Over and above that , however , was his growing suspicion of Chuck Stober's part in recent events . `` Gyp Carmer couldn't have known about Colcord's money unless he was told -- and who else would have told him '' ? ? He asked himself . `` It's the second time War Ax hands made a play for that money . How much of an accident could that be '' ? ? Nearing home , he jerked to attention at the distant crack of a gun . In town no one paid much attention to an occasional shot ; ; but on the range gunfire had a meaning . Hauling up , Russ listened carefully . Two minutes later it came again -- a double explosion , followed by a third , sounding more distant . As near as Cobb could determine the shots came from the direction of the Antler ranch house . He tightened up in a twinkling . So far as he knew , only his father could be there . What did it mean ? ? Clapping spurs to the bronc he set off at a sharp canter , with growing alarm . His first glimpse of the ranch house across the brushy swells told him nothing . Still a quarter-mile away , the fresh clap of guns only served to increase his speed . Setting a course straight for the house , he was covering ground fast when an angry bee buzzed past close to his face . When it was followed by a second , whining even closer , Cobb swerved sharply aside into a depression . He knew now what he was up against . Whoever was out there hiding in the brushy cover was besieging the Antler house and , having spotted his approach , was determined to drive him off before he could get into the fight . Cursing himself for having ridden out the last few days without a rifle in his saddle boot , Russ drew his Colt and examined it briefly . If he wondered whether the attackers would allow him to pull away unmolested , he had his answer a moment later . `` Over this way ! ! He ain't gone far '' ! ! A harsh cry floated to him across the brush . A carbine cracked more loudly , and a slug clipped fragments from the brush off at one side . The would-be assassin had his position figured pretty close . Dismounting , Russ looked about hastily . Toward the west this depression led toward a draw . Leading his pony , he hurried that way , not remounting till he was well below the level of the surrounding range . Swinging up then , and bending forward over the horn , he urged his mount down the meandering draw . He had not covered a hundred yards before a gun crashed from somewhere behind . He had been sighted , and his attacker pumping shot after shot . A shot or two went wild before Cobb felt something tug at his foot . A slug had torn half of his stirrup-guard away . A second twitched his shirtsleeve , and he felt a brief burn on his upper arm . Another snarled close overhead . `` Jumping Jerusalem ! ! Let's get out of here '' ! ! At the first shot Russ had hurled his mount to the left toward the side of the winding draw . The long minute before he reached effective cover seemed endless . Sweeping a look around , he saw that he was safe for the moment . He heard cries from behind him , but he could make out no words . He dashed madly for the next elbow turn in the draw , and made it . Recklessly hurling the bronc sidewise into an intersecting draw , he plunged forward with undiminished speed . Gradually the wash climbed upward , forcing him toward open range . Yet he must chance it . He clambered out of the dwindling wash , the loose dirt flying behind him , and flashed a look about . Early in November the clouds lifted enough to carry out the assigned missions . And Sweeney Squadron put its first marks on the combat record . Every plane that could fly was sent into the air . Cricket took eight ships and went south across the Straits and along the north coast of Mindanao to Cagayan . Anything the enemy flew or floated was his target . Fleischman with eight was to patrol the Leyte Gulf area , with his main task to get any kamikaze before they got to the ships . Greg himself took two flights , with Todman leading the second , to patrol and look for targets of opportunities around Ormoc on the east coast of Leyte . Each plane carried two five-hundred pound bombs . A weapons carrier took Greg , Todman , Belton , Banjo Ferguson , and Walters and the others the two miles from the bivouac area to the strip . It was a rough long ride through the mud and pot holes . No one had much to say . The sky glowered down at them . There was a feeling that this mission would be canceled like all the others and that this muddy wet dark world of combat would go on forever . The truck dropped them off at the various revetments spread through the jungle . Donovan snatched Greg's chute from him with a belligerent motion and almost ran to the plane with it . His face was dark as the sky above it as he stood on the wing and waited for his pilot . Greg climbed into the cockpit feeling as if he had never been in one before . But his hands and those of Donovan moved automatically adjusting and arranging in the check-out procedure . `` I've got her as neat as I can '' , Donovan said , as he dropped the straps of the Seton harness over Greg's shoulders . `` But this goddamn climate . It's for carabao not airplanes '' . `` We'll make out . Don't you worry , chief '' , Greg replied , wondering if he himself believed it . `` Yeah . See you '' , Donovan said as he jumped off the wing . The expression was his trade-mark , his open sesame to good luck , and his prayer that pilot and plane would always return . At the prearranged time , Greg started the engine and taxied out . From the time the chocks were pulled until the plane was out of sight , he knew Donovan would keep his back to the strip . He wondered where the superstition had originated that it was bad luck for a crew chief to watch his plane take off on a combat mission . Yet long before the scheduled time for return , Donovan would be watching for every speck in the sky . Greg rumbled down the rough metal taxi strip , and one by one the seven members of his flight fell in behind him . The dark brown bombs hanging under each wing looked large and powerful . The pilots' heads looked ridiculously small . The control tower gave him immediate take-off permission , and the clean roar of the engine that took him off the rough strip spoke well of the skill of Donovan . Greg's mission was the last to leave , and as he circled the ships off Tacloban he saw the clouds were dropping down again . To the west , the dark green hills of Leyte were lost in the clouds about halfway up their slopes . Underneath him the sea was a dark and muddied gray . Water splashed against his windshield as he led the flight in and out of showers . The metal strip they had taken off from was coal black against the green jungle around it . He possessed the fighter pilot's horror of bad weather and instrument flying , and he wondered , if the ceiling did drop , whether he and the other flights would be able to find their way back in this unfamiliar territory . He shivered in the warm cockpit . The overcast was solid above him . As far as he could see there was no hole to climb through it . They would have to go west through the narrow river valley that separated Leyte from Samar and hope that it didn't close in before they returned . Greg pushed the radio button on his throttle . `` Todman , let's try to go under this stuff . Stay in close and we'll go up the valley '' . `` Roger , Sweeney '' , Todman called back , and pulled his four in and slightly above Greg . Greg took the formation wide around three A-26 attack bombers that were headed north over the Gulf . He dropped down to five hundred feet , swinging a little north of the city of Tacloban , and punched into the opening that showed against the mountain . The valley was only a few hundred yards wide with just about room enough for a properly performed hundred-and-eighty-degree turn . It was only a fifteen-minute flight , but before it was through Greg felt himself developing a case of claustrophobia . The ceiling stayed solid above them at about eight hundred feet , and at times the sheer cliffs seemed about to close in . If the other pilots were worried , they did not show it . The formation remained perfect . When the sea was visible ahead of them , the relief was as great as if the sun had come out . He spread the flight out and led them across a point of land and then down the coast . Although they drew light ground fire they saw no signs of activity . Once Todman thought he had spotted a tank and went down to investigate while Greg covered him . `` Somebody beat us to it '' ! ! Todman said over the radio as he came back up in formation . Visibility continued to be limited , and Greg was never able to get above a thousand feet . It was frustrating . His earphones were constantly full of the sounds of enemy contacts made by other flights . He thought once that he identified the somewhat hysterical voice of Fleischman claiming a kill . But Greg's area remained as placid as a Florida dawn . Finally , as time began to run out , he headed into Ormoc and glide-bombed a group of houses that Intelligence had thought might contain Japanese supplies . The low clouds made bombing difficult . There was not enough room to make the usual vertical bomb run . The accuracy was deplorable . One of Greg's bombs hung up , and he was miles from the target before he could get rid of it . Only one of the flight scored a direct hit and the rest blew up jungle . With their load of bombs gone , the planes moved swiftly and easily . Greg went up tight against the ceiling and led them back to their pass to home . Mercifully , it was still open . Like a man making a deep dive , Greg took full breath and plunged back into the valley . He was about to make a gas check on his flight when Todman's voice broke in : `` Sweeneys ! ! Three bogies . Twelve o'clock level '' . Greg's eyes flicked up from his instrument panel . He saw them , specks against the gray , but closing fast . They were headed straight for each other on a collision course . Friend or enemy ? ? The same old question . And only a few seconds to answer it . `` Zeros '' ! ! Todman said excitedly , and hopefully . And then he thought Todman might be right . His mind flicked through the mental pictures he had from the hours of Aircraft Identification . He narrowed the shape down to two : either a Zero or a U. S. Navy type aircraft . If it were the enemy , tactically his position was correct . Japanese aircraft were strong on maneuverability , American on speed and firepower . His present maximum altitude , up against the overcast , gave him the opportunity to exploit his advantages . But it also made him conspicuous to the enemy , if it was the enemy , and he hadn't been spotted already . But the closing aircraft showed no sign of deviating from their original course . In seconds , Greg made his decision . He pushed the radio button . `` Sweeney Blue , hit the deck . Lots of throttle . Todman , you take the one on the left . I'll take the middle . Belton , the one on the right . If they're Japs . Let's make sure first '' . Greg had the stick forward and the throttle up before he heard the two `` Rogers '' . The planes , light with most of the gas burned out , responded beautifully . Greg's airspeed indicator was over 350 when he leveled off just above the trees . The opposing aircraft continued to come on . They appeared to be the enemy . Greg wished the Air Corps had continued to camouflage planes . There was , of course , no way for the other planes to get by them . It was a box . But they could turn and escape to the east . Greg pushed the radio button again . `` Todman , drop your second element back . If any of us miss , they can pick up the pieces . Now let's make sure they're Japs '' . Even as he said it , Greg knew they had found the enemy . The shapes were unmistakable and the Rising Suns were showing up , slightly brighter pinpoints in the gray gloom . Greg slapped his hand across the switches that turned on the guns and gun camera and gun sight . The circle with the dot in the center showed up yellow on the reflector glass in front of him . His hands shook . `` Arm your guns , Sweeneys '' . `` They're Japs . They're Japs '' , came a high-pitched voice . `` Greg to Sweeney Blue . One pass only . No turns . You'll bust your ass in this canyon . That's an order '' . He moved the flights over against one wall . It gave them all a chance to make a high-speed climbing turn attack and a break-away that would not take them into the overcast or force a tight-turn recovery . If the turn was too tight , a barrel roll would bring them out . A hell of an altitude for a barrel roll , but it could be done . Greg slammed his throttle to the fire wall and rammed up the RPM , and the engine responded as if it had been waiting . The clearly identifiable enemy continued on as if no one else were around . `` They haven't seen us '' , Greg yelled to himself over the engine noise . `` They haven't seen us '' . He hit the radio button . `` Now , Sweeneys , now . Let's take 'em home '' . He hauled back on the stick and felt his cheeks sag . Out of the corner of his eye , he watched his wingman move out a bit and shoot up with him . Perfect , he thought . With the rapid rate of closure , the approach from below , the side , and ahead , there would be only a moment when damage could be done . Just like shooting at a duck while performing a half-gainer from a diving board . He tightened his turn . His nose up . It was going to be dangerous . Eight aircraft in this small box . Please , dear God , make my pilots good , he prayed . He took a lead on the enemy , using a distance of five of the radii in his circular sight and then added another . The enemy did not veer . It did not seem possible that they hadn't been spotted . Blind fools . Now ! ! Greg's fingers closed on the stick trigger . The plane rumbled and slowed . Six red lines etched their way into the gray and vanished . As if drawn by a wire the enemy flew into them . Greg tightened his turn until the plane shuddered . Luck was with him . His burst held for a second on the engine section of the plane . The Jap's propeller flew off in pieces . A large piece of engine cowling vanished . It was all Greg had time to see . His maneuvering for the shot had placed him near the overcast , almost inverted and heading up into the clouds . His speed was dropping rapidly . If he spun out now , he would join his opponent on the ground . Wingman , stay clear , he prayed . He pushed stick and rudder and entered the overcast on his back . He fought the panic of vertigo . He had no idea which was up and which was down . He held the controls where they had been . Sweat popped out over him and he felt the slick between his palm and the stick grip . His air speed dropped until he thought he would spin out . Over the rattling of fenders , humming of tires and chattering of gears there was a charming melody of whispers and tiny giggles . Cool air moving slowly through the open or smashed-out side windows hinted of blooming roadside vegetation , and occasionally a faint fragrance of perfume swirled from the back seat . `` Moriarty '' , my driver suddenly exclaimed with something so definite , so final in his tone I once more repeated the absurdity , mustering all my latent powers of hypocrisy to sound convinced . We were coming to an intersection , turning right , chuffing to a stop . Forced to realize that this was the end of a very short line I scanned a road marker and discovered what the end of a slightly longer line would be for the old Mexican : Moriarty , New Mexico . `` Gracias . Adios '' , I said , exhausting my Spanish vocabulary on my host and exchanging one of a scarcely-tapped store of smiles with my host's daughters . I waved with discretion and moderation to the vague golden faces fading through rising dust and the distortions of the back window glass . Then I saw the father's head slightly turn ; ; gauche rainbow shapes replaced the poignant ovals of gold . Autos whizzed past . White-shirted and conservatively-cravated drivers stared conspicuously toward the eastern horizon and past my supplicating and accusing gaze . Suddenly a treble auto horn tootley-toot-tootled , and , thumbing hopefully , I saw emergent in windshield flash : red lips , streaming silk of blonde hair and -- ah , trembling confusion of hope , apprehension , despair -- the leering face of old Herry . `` Mor-ee-air-teeeee '' , he shrieked , his white teeth grossly counterpointing those of the glittering blonde . Over the rapidly-diminishing outline of a jump seat piled high with luggage Herry's black brushcut was just discernible , near , or enviably near that spot where -- hidden -- more delicately-textured , most beautifully tinted hair must still be streaming back in cool , oh cool wind sweetly perfumed with sagebrush and yucca flowers and engine fumes . Damn his luck . I would have foregone my romantic chances rather than leave a friend sweltering and dusty and -- Well , at least I wouldn't have shouted back a taunt . Still nursing anger I listlessly thumbed a car that was slowly approaching , its pre-war chrome nearly blinding me . It was stopping . Just as I straightened up with my duffel bag , I heard : `` Sahjunt Yoorick , meet Mrs. Major J. A. Roebuck '' . The voice was that of Johnson , tail gunner off another crew . Squeezing a look between Johnson's fat jowls and the car frame a handsome and still darkhaired lady inquired `` Y'all drahve '' ? ? I nodded . `` Onleh one thiihng '' , Mrs. Roebuck continued . `` Ahm goin nawth t'jawn mah husbun in Sante Fe , an y'all maht prefuh the suhthuhn rewt . But Corporal Johnson has alreadeh said it didn make no diffrunce t'hi-im '' . I said that it didn't make any difference to me either , as far as I knew . How far I knew will shortly become apparent . Let me pass over the trip to Sante Fe with something of the same speed which made Mrs. Roebuck `` wonduh if the wahtahm speed limit '' ( 35 m.p.h. ) `` is still in ee-faket '' . I let up on the accelerator , only to gradually reach again the 60 m.p.h. which would , I hoped , overhaul Herry and the blonde , and as there were cars whose drivers apparently had something more important to catch than had I , Mrs. Major Roebuck settled down to practicing on Corporal Johnson the kittenish wiles she would need when making her duty call on Colonel and Mrs. Somebody in Sante Fe . When Johnson ejaculated `` Howsabout my buying us all a nice cold Co-cola , Ma'am '' ? ? Mrs. Roebuck smilingly declined and began suddenly to go on about her son , who was `` onleh a little younguh than you bawhs '' . Johnson never would have believed she had a son that age . Mrs. Roebuck thought Johnson was a `` sweet bawh t'lah lahk thet '' , but her Herman was getting to be a man , there was no getting around it . `` Just befoh he left foh his academeh we wuh hevin dack-rihs on the vuhranduh , Major Roebuck an Ah , an Huhmun says ' May Ah hev one too ' ? ? Just as p'lite an -- an cohnfidunt , an Ah says ' Uh coahse you cain't ' , but he says ' Whah nawt , you ah hevin one ' ? ? An Ah coudn ansuh him an so Ah said ' Aw right , Ah gay-ess , an his fathuh didn uttuh one wohd an aftuh Huhmun was gone , the majuh laughed an tole me thet he an the bawh had been hevin an occasional drink t'gethuh f'ovuh a yeah , onleh an occasional one , but just the same it was behahn mah back , an Ah doan think thet's nahce at all , d'you '' ? ? `` No , I don't '' , Johnson said . `` I'm a good Baptist , and drinking '' Mrs. Roebuck very kindly let me drive through Sante Fe to a road which would , she said , lead us to Taos and then Raton and `` eventshahleh '' out of New Mexico . How lightly her `` eventshah-leh '' passed into the crannies where I was storing dialect material for some vaguely dreamed opus , and how the word would echo . And re-echo . Hardly had Mrs. Roebuck driven off when a rusty pick-up truck , father or grandfather of Senor `` Moriarty's '' Ford sedan , came screeching to a dust-swirling stop , and a brown face appeared , its nose threatened by shards of what had once been the side window . `` Get in , buddies . Get in '' . The straight , black hair flopped in a vigorous nod , the slender nose plunged toward glass teeth and drew safely back . Johnson unwired the right hand door , whose window was , like the left one , merely loosely-taped fragments of glass , and Johnson wadded himself into a narrow seat made still more narrow by three cases of beer . `` In back , buddy '' , the driver said to me . Quickly but carefully lowering my duffel bag over the low side-rack , I stepped on the running board ; ; it flopped down , sprang back up and gouged my shin . The truck was hurtling forward . I seized the rack and made a western-style flying-mount just in time , one of my knees mercifully landing on my duffel bag -- and merely wrecking my camera , I was to discover later -- my other knee landing on the slivery truck floor boards and -- but this is no medical report . I was again in motion and at a speed which belied the truck's similarity to Senor X's Ford turtle . Maybe I would beat old Herry to Siberia after all . Whatever satisfaction that might offer . Something pulled my leg . I drew back , drawing back my foot for a kick . But it was only Johnson reaching around the wire chicken fencing , which half covered the truck cab's glassless rear window . The way his red rubber lips were stretched across his pearly little teeth I thought he was only having a little joke , but , no , he wanted me to bend down from the roar of wind so he could roar something into my ear . `` Wanna beer '' ? ? `` Hell , yes '' , I roared back between dusty lips . Did I want a beer ? ? Did an anteater want ants ? ? `` Bueno , amigo . Gracias '' , I hollered , my first long swallow filling me with confidence and immediately doubling the size of my Spanish vocabulary . At once my ears were drowned by a flow of what I took to be Spanish , but -- the driver's white teeth flashing at me , the road wildly veering beyond his glistening hair , beyond his gesticulating bottle -- it could have been the purest Oxford English I was half hearing ; ; I wouldn't have known the difference . Johnson was trying to grab the wheel , though the swerve of the truck was throwing him away from it . White teeth suddenly vanishing , the driver slammed the side of his bottle against Johnson's ear . We were off the road , gleaming barbed wire pulling taut . I ducked just as the first strand broke somewhere down the line and came whipping over the sideboards . We were in a field , in a tight , screeching turn . Prairie dogs were popping up and popping down . When I fell on my back , I saw a vulture hovering . Just as I got to my knees , there was again the sound of the fence stretching , and I had time only to start taking my kneeling posture seriously . This time no wire came whipping into the truck . We were back on the road . I regained my squatting position behind the truck cab's rear window . Johnson's left hand was pressed against the side of his head , red cheeks whitening beneath his fingers . `` Tee-wah '' , the driver cackled , his black eyes glittering behind dull silver chicken fencing . `` That was Tee-wah I was talking . You thought I was a Mexican , didn't you , buddy '' ? ? I nodded . `` Hell , that's all right , buddy '' , the Indian ( I now guessed ) said . `` Drink your beer '' . Miraculously , the bottle was still in my hand , foam still geysering over my ( luckily ) waterproof watch . No sooner had I started drinking than the driver started zigzagging the truck . The beer foamed furiously . I drank furiously . A long time . Emptied the bottle . Teeth again flashing back at me , the driver released a deluge of Spanish in which `` amigo '' appeared every so often like an island in the stormy waves of surrounding sound . I bobbed my head each time it appeared . Suddenly the Spanish became an English in which only one word emerged with clarity and precision , `` son of a bitch '' , sometimes hyphenated by vicious jabs of a beer bottle into Johnson's quivering ribs . A big car was approaching , its chrome teeth grinning . Beyond it the gray road stretched a long , long way . The car was just about to us , its driver's fat , solemn face intent on the road ahead , on business , on a family in Sante Fe -- on anything but an old pick-up truck in which two human beings desperately needed rescue . I tossed the bottle . High , so it would only bounce harmlessly but loudly off the car's steel roof . Too high . On unoccupied roadway the bottle shattered into a small amber flash . `` Aye-yah-ah-ah '' ! ! The Indian was again raising his bottle , but to my astonished relief -- probably only a fraction of Johnson's -- the bottle this time went to the Indian's lips . Another car was coming , a tiny , dark shape on a far hill . I started looking on the splintery truck bed for a piece of board , a dirt clod -- anything I could throw and with better aim than I had thrown the beer bottle . We were slowing . In the ditch sand was white and soft-looking , only an occasional pebble discernible , faintly gleaming . But Johnson couldn't quickly unwire the truck door , and if I escaped , he might suffer . The car was approaching fast . On the truck bed there was nothing smaller than a piece of rusty machinery ; ; with more time I could have loosened a small burr or cotter pin -- Suddenly and not a second too soon I thought of the coins in my pocket . There was no time to pick out a penny ; ; I got a coin between my thumb and forefinger , leaned my elbows in a very natural and casual manner on top of the truck cab and flipped my little missile . There was a blur just under my focus of vision , a crash ; ; the car's far windshield panel turned into a silver web with a dark hole in the center . I heard the screech of brakes behind me , an insane burst of laughter beneath me . Looking back I saw a gray-haired man getting out of his halted car and trying to read our license number . `` S-s-sahjunt '' . Johnson's fat hand , another bottle were protruding from the truck cab , and that self-proclaimed Baptist teetotaler , had a bottle at his own lips . Two cars came over a crest , their chrome and glass flashing . The Indian's arm whipped sidewise -- there was a flash of amber and froth , the crash of the bottle shattering against the side of the first car . Brakes shrieked behind us . I saw Johnson's bottle snatched from his hand , saw it go in a swirl of foam just behind the second car . This time there was no sound of brakes but the shrieking of women . I looked back at pale ovals framed in the elongated oval of the car's rear window . `` Drink , you son of a bitch '' ! ! I quickly turned around and began to drink . But the Indian was jabbing another bottle toward Johnson . I guided her to the divan , turned off the TV , faced her . She sat quietly , staring at me from the wide eyes . And what eyes they were . Big and dark , a melting , golden brown . Eyes like hot honey , eyes that sizzled . Plus flawless skin , smooth brow and cheeks , lips that looked as if you could get a shock from them . It was a disturbingly familiar face , too , but I couldn't remember where we had met . I said , `` Do we know each other , Miss '' ? ? `` No , I remembered reading about you in the papers and that you lived here , and when it happened all I could think of was '' -- This time she stopped the rush of words herself . `` I'm sorry . Shall I go on '' ? ? She smiled . It was her first smile . But worth waiting for . `` Sure '' . I said . `` But one word at a time , O.K. '' ? ? She was still hugging the stained coat around her , so I said , `` Relax , let me take your things . Would you like a drink , or coffee '' ? ? `` No , thanks '' . She stood up , pulled the coat from her shoulders and started to slide it off , then let out a high-pitched scream and I let out a low-pitched , wobbling sound like a muffler blowing out . She was wearing nothing beneath the coat . She jerked the coat back on and squeezed it around her again , but not soon enough . There had been a good second or two during which my muffler had been blowing out , and now I was certain I'd seen her somewhere before . `` I forgot '' ! ! She yelped . `` Oh , do forgive me . I'm sorry '' ! ! `` I forgive '' -- `` That's what started all the trouble in the first place . Oh , dear , I'm all unstrung '' . `` You and me both , dear . Haven't we haven't I seen you . I mean , surely we've '' -- `` You may have seen me on TV '' , she said . `` I've done several filmed commercials for '' -- Then it hit me . `` Zing '' ! ! I cried . `` Why , yes . And you recognized me '' ? ? `` Yes , indeed . In fact , I was watching you on that little seventeen-inch screen when you rang my bell . Man , you rang -- it was in color , too , Miss , and Miss ? ? What's your name , anyway ? ? Ah , you were splendid '' . I sat by her on the divan . `` Splendid . In a waterfall and all that '' . `` That's the last one we did . That was a fun one '' . `` I'll bet . It was fun for me , all right . I don't mean to pry , but do they hide the swimsuit with the bubbles ? ? I mean : Is advertising honest ? ? `` It depends on who does it . I never wear anything at all . It wouldn't -- wouldn't seem fair , somehow '' . `` I couldn't agree with you more '' . `` I really do have something important to tell you , Mr. Scott . About the murder '' . `` Murder ? ? Oh , yeah '' , I said . `` Tell me about the murder '' . She told me . Zing was the creation of two men , Louis Thor and Bill Blake , partners in zing ! ! , Inc. . They'd peddled the soap virtually alone , and without much success , until about a year ago , when -- with the addition of `` SX-21 '' to their secret formula and the inauguration of a high-powered advertising campaign -- sales had soared practically into orbit . Their product had been endorsed by Good Housekeeping , the A.M.A. , and the Veterinary Journal , among other repositories of higher wisdom , and before much longer if you didn't have a cake of their soap in the john , even your best friends would think you didn't bathe . My lovely caller -- Joyce Holland was her name -- had previously done three filmed commercials for zing , and this evening , the fourth , a super production , had been filmed at the home of Louis Thor . The water in Thor's big swimming pool had been covered with a blanket of thick , foamy soapsuds -- fashioned , of course , from zing -- Joyce had dived from the board into the pool , then swirled and cavorted in her luxurious `` bath '' while cameras rolled . The finished -- and drastically cut -- product would begin with a hazy longshot of Joyce entering the suds , then bursting above the pool's surface clad in layers of lavender lather , and I had a hunch this item was going to sell tons and tons of soap ; ; even to clean men and boys . Joyce went on , `` When we'd finished , Lou -- Mr. Thor -- asked me to stay a little longer . He wanted a few stills for magazine ads , he said . Everybody left and I stayed in the pool , then Lou came back alone and leaped into the pool too . And he didn't have any clothes on '' . `` He didn't '' ! ! `` Yes , he didn't . Did , I mean '' . She paused . `` Did leap into the pool , and didn't have anything on . Anyway , it was evident what he had in mind '' . `` You got away , didn't you '' ? ? `` Yes . He caught up with me once and grabbed me , but I was all covered with zing -- it's very slippery , you know '' . `` I didn't know . I wouldn't have the stuff in the house . But I'm pleased to hear '' -- `` So I just scooted out of his clutches . I swam like mad , got out of the pool , grabbed my robe , and ran to the car . The keys were still in it , and I was miles away before I remembered that my clothes and purse and everything were still in the little cabana where I'd changed '' . She'd driven around for a while , Joyce said , then , thinking Louis Thor would have calmed down by that time , she'd gone back to his home on Bryn Mawr Drive , parked in front , and walked toward the pool . While several yards from it , still concealed by the shrubbery , she'd seen two men on her left at the pool's edge . She went on : `` A man was holding onto Lou , holding him up . Maybe Lou was only unconscious , but right then I thought he must be dead . The man shoved him into the water , then ran past the cabana . There's a walk there that goes out to Quebec Drive . I was so scared well , I just ran to my car and came here '' . `` You know who the other man was '' ? ? `` No , I never did see his face . I didn't get a good look at him at all , his back was to me , and I was so scared It was just somebody in a man's suit . But I'm sure the other one was Lou '' . What Joyce wanted me to do was go to Thor's house and `` do whatever detectives do '' , and get her clothes -- and handbag containing her identification . She realized I'd have to notify the police , but fervently hoped I could avoid mentioning her name . Her impact in the zing commercials had led to her being considered for an excellent part in an upcoming TV series , Underwater Western Eye , a documentary-type show to be sponsored by Oatnut Grits . But if Joyce got involved in murder or salacious scandal , the role would probably go to the sponsor's wife , Mrs. Oatnut Grits . Or at least not to Joyce . `` And I so want the part '' , she said . `` The commercials have just been for money , there hasn't been any real incentive for me to do them , but in Underwater Western Eye I'd have a chance to act . I could show what I can do '' . As far as I was concerned , she had already and had dandily shown what she could do . But I promised Joyce I would mention her name , if at all , only as a last resort . Seeming much relieved , she smiled one of those worth-waiting-for smiles , and I smiled all the way into the bedroom . There I got my Colt Special and shoulder harness , slipped my coat on , and went back into the front room . Joyce squirmed a little on the divan . `` I'm starting to itch '' , she said . `` Itch '' ? ? `` Yes , I'm still all covered with that soap . I was loaded with suds when I ran away , and I haven't had a chance to wash it off . Mmmm , it sure itches '' . `` You might as well wait here while I'm gone , so you can use my shower if you'd like '' . `` Oh , I'd love to '' . I showed her the shower and tub , and she said , smiling , `` If you really don't mind , I think I'll get clean in the shower , then soak for a few minutes in your tub . That always relaxes me . Doesn't it you '' ? ? `` Only when I do it '' . I shook my head . One of my virtues or vices is a sort of three-dimensional imagination complete with sound effects and glorious living color . `` Soak as long as you want , Joyce . It'll probably be at least an hour or two before I can check back with you . So you'll have everything all to yourself , doggone '' I looked at my watch . Ten after nine . Time to go , I supposed . `` Well , goodbye '' , I said . `` Goodbye . You'd better hurry '' . `` Oh , you can count on that '' . She smiled slightly . Softly . Warmly . `` Don't hurry too much . I'll be soaking for at least half an hour '' . That was all she said . But suddenly those hot-honey eyes seemed to have everything but swarms of bees in them . However , when there's a job to be done , I'm a monstrosity of grim determination , I like to think . I spun about and clattered through the front room to the door . As I went out , I could hear water pouring in the shower . Hot water . She wouldn't be taking a cold shower . Hell , she couldn't . Bryn Mawr Drive is only two or three miles from the Spartan , and it took me less than five minutes to get there . But the scene was not the quiet , calm scene I'd expected . Four cars were parked at the curb , and two of them were police radio cars . Lights blazed in the big house and surrounding grounds . I followed a shrubbery-lined gravel path alongside the house to the pool . Two uniformed officers , a couple of plain-clothesmen I knew , and two other men stood on a gray cement area next to the pool on my left . At the pool's far end was the little cabana Joyce had mentioned , and on the water's surface floated scattered lavender patches of limp-looking lather . A few yards beyond the group of men , a man's nude body lay face down on a patch of thick green dichondra . Lieutenant Rawlins , one of the plain-clothesmen , spotted me and said , `` Hi , Shell '' , and walked toward me . `` How'd you hear about this one '' ? ? I grinned , but ignored the question . He didn't push it ; ; Rawlins worked out of Central Homicide and we'd been friends for years . He filled me in . A call to the police had been placed from here a couple of minutes after nine P.M. , and the first police car had arrived two or three minutes after that -- 10 minutes ago now . Present at the scene -- in addition to the dead man , who was indeed Louis Thor -- had been Thor's partner Bill Blake , and Antony Rose , an advertising agency executive who handled the zing account . Neither of them , I understood , had been present at the filming session earlier . `` What were they doing here '' ? ? I asked Rawlins . `` They were supposed to meet Thor at nine PM for a conference concerning the ad campaign for their soap , a new angle based on this SX-21 stuff '' . `` Yeah , I've heard more about SX-21 than space exploration lately . What is the gunk '' ? ? `` How would I know ? ? It's a secret . That was the new advertising angle -- something about a Lloyd's of London policy to insure the secrecy of the secret ingredient . Actually , only two men know what the formula is , Blake and '' -- He stopped and looked at Thor's body . I said , `` O.K. , so now only Blake knows . How's it strike you , foul or fair '' ? ? `` Can't say yet . Deputy coroner says it looks like he sucked in a big pile of those thick suds and strangled on 'em . The PM might show he drowned instead , but that's what the once-over-lightly gives us . Accident , murder , suicide -- take your pick '' . `` I'll pick murder . Anything else '' ? ? `` According to Rose , he arrived here a couple minutes before nine and spotted Thor in the water , got a hooked pole from the pool-equipment locker and started hauling him out . Too many people think that the primary purpose of a higher education is to help you make a living ; ; this is not so , for education offers all kinds of dividends , including how to pull the wool over a husband's eyes while you are having an affair with his wife . If it were not for an old professor who made me read the classics I would have been stymied on what to do , and now I understand why they are classics ; ; those who wrote them knew people and what made people tick . I worked for my Uncle ( an Uncle by marriage so you will not think this has a mild undercurrent of incest ) who ran one of those antique shops in New Orleans' Vieux Carre , the old French Quarter . The arrangement I had with him was to work four hours a day . The rest of the time I devoted to painting or to those other activities a young and healthy man just out of college finds interesting . I had a one-room studio which overlooked an ancient courtyard filled with flowers and plants , blooming everlastingly in the southern sun . I had come to New Orleans two years earlier after graduating college , partly because I loved the city and partly because there was quite a noted art colony there . When my Uncle offered me a part-time job which would take care of my normal expenses and give me time to paint I accepted . The arrangement turned out to be excellent . I loved the city and I particularly loved the gaiety and spirit of Mardi Gras . I had seen two of them and we would soon be in another city-wide , joyous celebration with romance in the air ; ; and , when you took a walk you never knew what adventure or pair of sparkling eyes were waiting around the next corner . The very faces of the people bore this expectation of fun and pleasure . It was as if they could hardly wait to get into their costumes , cover their faces with masks and go adventuring . My Uncle and I were not too close socially because of the difference in our ages . Sometimes I wondered vaguely what he did about women for my Aunt , by blood , had died some years ago , but neither of us said anything . One Monday morning I saw him approach the store with a woman and introduce me to her as my new Aunt . They were married over the week-end , though he was easily sixty and she could not have been even thirty . She looked more like twenty-five or six . It was really a May and December combination . My new Aunt was perhaps three or four years older than I and it had been a long time since I had seen as gorgeous a woman who oozed sex . There was something about the contour of her face , her smile that was like New Orleans sunshine , the way she held her head , the way she walked -- there was scarcely anything she did which did not fascinate me . Her legs were the full , sexy kind , full bodied like a rare wine and just as tantalizing to the appetite ; ; the calf was magnificent , the ankle perfect . You must forgive me if I seem to dwell too much on her physical aspects but I am an artist , accustomed to studying the physical body . The true artist is like one of those scientists who , from a single bone can reconstruct an animal's entire body . The artist looks at an ankle , a calf , a bosom and , in his mind's eye , the clothes drop away and he sees her as she really is . And that is the way I first saw her when my Uncle brought her into his antique store . That she impressed me instantly was obvious ; ; I was aware that when our eyes met we both quickly averted them . I thought I saw a faint surge of color rise to her neck and quickly suffuse her cheeks . True , she was my Aunt , married to an Uncle related to me only by marriage , but why she had married a man twice her age , and more , perhaps , I did not know or much care . She was standing with her back to the glass door . Her form was silhouetted and with the strong light I could see the outlines of her body , a body that an artist or anyone else would have admired . As it is in so many affairs of the heart , a man and a woman meet and something clicks . Something clicked in this instance , but I treated her circumspectly and I felt that she knew it , for we both kept our distance . When she appeared at the store to help out for a few hours even my looking at her was surreptitious lest my Uncle notice it . And then I became aware that she , too , glanced at me surreptitiously . I felt that her eyes were undressing me as if she were a painter and I a nude model . I dismissed these feelings as wishful thinking but I could not get it out of my head that we had a strong physical attraction for one another and we both feared to dwell on it because of our relationship . When our eyes met the air was filled with an unuttered message of `` Me , too '' . You have probably experienced this . It is nothing you can put your fingers on but the air suddenly fills with a high charge of electricity . Why she married him I do not know . I myself was fond of him but what a young woman half his age saw in him was a mystery to me . He already had that slow pace that comes over the elderly , while she herself had all the signs of one who appreciates the joys of living . Perhaps , with my Uncle , she found a measure of economic security that she needed ; ; or maybe she liked men old enough to be her father ; ; some women with father fixations do . For several weeks we eyed one another almost like sparring partners , and then one day Uncle was slightly indisposed and stayed home ; ; his bride opened the store . I was waiting in front of it when she showed up and told me of my Uncle's indisposition . Even as she was telling me about it I became aware of a give-away flush that suffused her neck and moved upwards to her cheeks , and subconsciously I realized that when she entered the store she did not switch on the lights . The cavernous depth , cluttered with antiques , echoed to her hard heels as she walked directly to the office in the rear and took the seat at his desk . She placed her palms , fingers outspread , on the desk in an odd gesture as if to say , `` Now , what next '' ? ? I was aware of a humid look in her eyes that told me the time was opportune . There was little likelihood of any customers walking in at that hour . I was standing beside her , watching the outspread palms and wondering about the old horsehair sofa against the wall on which he sometimes napped . I bent and kissed the still pink neck and suddenly she jumped up , and her two arms encircled me in a bear-like crush . Her mouth , which had been so much in my thoughts , was warm and moist and tender . I heard her murmur , `` We'd better lock the door '' . It did not take me long to slip the bolt securely and return to the rear and its couch . When we opened the door again for business and switched on the lights she said : `` He will not always be indisposed '' . `` I know . I was thinking about that . How will we work it out '' ? ? `` I don't know '' , she said . `` You're the man . You figure it out . I've noticed the way you've been looking at me ever since we met '' . `` I guess we both felt it '' . I said . `` I guess so '' , she said . `` But now what '' ? ? Even as I said it I realized that an education can be invaluable . `` I know what we can do '' , I said . `` Tell him I made a pass at you '' . She raised a protesting hand with a startled air . `` What are you trying to do ? ? Get thrown out ? ? If I even hint at it do you think it will matter that you are his nephew -- and not even a blood nephew '' ? ? `` I don't want to be thrown out and I don't think I will . I think I have a way so we can carry on without his suspecting us '' . `` By telling him you are making passes at me '' ? ? She said incredulously . `` When I was in college '' , I grinned , `` I remember a poem I had to read in my lit class . I don't even remember who wrote it but it was one of those 15th or 16th century poets . In those days poems often told a story in verse and those boys had some corkers to tell ; ; and now I think we can use the knowledge they passed on to us . Tomorrow Mardi Gras opens officially . A lot of people will roam the streets in costumes and masks , and having a ball . There will be romance and flirtation . If you tell him I made a pass at you he might think you misunderstood something I said or did , so instead of just telling him I made a pass , say I tried to date you and that you agreed so you could prove to him what a louse I really am . We made a rendezvous tomorrow evening at nine on some street near Lake Ponchartrain . And to prove what you tell him about me you suggest that he keep the date instead . You are both the same size . He could use your clothes for a costume and a heavy veil for a mask . When I show up he will know you are a good wife to have told him about it '' . `` But you '' -- she began . `` Don't worry about me . It will turn out all right '' . `` I don't understand '' , she insisted . `` Are you trying to cut your throat '' ? ? `` No '' , I chuckled , `` I'm just beginning to collect dividends on my investment in education '' . As we expected , on the following day my Uncle was completely recovered and opened the store as usual at 10 in the morning . I felt that he looked at me coldly and appraisingly and seemed to be uncertain what his attitude towards me should be , but he did not say one word which might indicate that he had been told of advances to his wife . I quit work at my usual hour as if this day was no different from other days . I heard subsequently that my Uncle and Aunt had dinner in a nearby restaurant in the French Quarter after which he went home to get into his costume to keep the date . Shortly before nine I drove my jalopy to the street facing the Lake and parked the car in shadows far enough away from the rendezvous corner but near enough to keep the corner in clear view . A few minutes later I saw my Uncle's car drive up and a woman's figure emerge and walk to the corner . I must say the figure was well made up . If it were not that I knew who it was I could have mistaken it for my Aunt so well did her clothes fit him . In one hand he gripped firmly a parasol though there had been no indication of rain . I suspected why he brought it along . In the half darkness I approached cautiously , making sure he did not see me . He was looking out on the dark waters of the Lake when I came upon him and without wasting words I smacked him hard across the face . `` You cheap bitch '' ! ! I exclaimed . `` You cheap , no good , two-timing bitch ! ! You get a good , loyal husband -- smack ! ! -- and you fall for a pass by his own nephew ! ! You should -- smack ! ! -- be ashamed of yourself . He had better write a postcard to Walter . He opened the myth book again and there ( along the margin next to Robert Graves' imaginative interpretation of the creation of the Dactyls from Rhea's fingertips ) were the names of four Munich bars and Meredith Wilder's address . The bars were marked as Walter had marked them in a small black book kept in a nearly secret drawer . The code , which had probably something to do with sex or some other interest , Nicolas was determined to find out and put to use . A card to Walter would get him an introduction to this Meredith , and that might be good for something . Nicolas called on his muse , a line came back : `` Squaresville , man , and all the palazzos are crummy Palasts '' . That ought to draw a laugh , Nicolas reasoned , as he stored the line away on the wax tape that was his mind . And indeed , his postcard did draw from Walter a letter recommending his friend , the poet Nicolas Manas , to his friend Meredith Wilder . Five days later , on receiving it , Meredith sat drumming his dactyls on his writing table . Dammit ! ! He inwardly cried . His hand was large and square and heavily tanned . The voice crying in him was the voice of guilt . His four weeks in Italy had turned into nearer three months . He had returned to the pension a week ago . Now , he was just in the late poems of Holderlin and therefore had most of the nineteenth century before him -- plus next semester's class preparation . He was determined to spend an industrious summer . Well , maybe Manas wouldn't call . Meredith's fingers slowed and stopped over a line before him : Sie lacheln , die Schwarzen Hexen . The menace of Manas gradually faded as Meredith asked himself should he translate it , ' How the dark fates laughed ' ? ? Or , more rhythmically , ' The swarthy witches are laughing ' ? ? And he missed the point that the swarthy witches might be laughing at him for hoping to escape Nicolas Manas . But Nicolas , too , was being interrupted , that morning . Not by the 11:00 sun which had spread a warmth around his spot of grass in the English Gardens and sent him off to sleep ; ; but by a blond girl in a sweater and skirt who stood a few yards off and tenderly regarded him . Should she wake him ? ? She didn't have the heart . Her heart , her maternal feeling , in fact her being was too busy expressing itself , as quietly thrilled by this sight of her Nicolas curled asleep under a blanket , in a park like a scene from Poussin . She was just not able to break the spell . ( Would she have been able to had she known that the blanket belonged to a young ballet dancer Nicolas had found his first night in one of Walter's marked bars ? ? Nicolas : `` Look , Nicolas doesn't go to bed with boys -- no sex , see ? ? So if all these beers was to get me in bed , man , you just spent a lot of money '' . Ballet dancer : Protests , tears , and `` take what you want , Nicolas , I am a dancer , you are a poet , it is all beautiful '' . To this meek conjugation Nicolas had replied , `` O.K. I can use this blanket . And when you get off this job tonight , well , you can gimme something to eat '' . And , as a matter of fact , Nicolas had slept in the park only part of one night , when he discovered that Munich's early mornings even in summer are laden with dew . He had always known how to find a bed , and on his own terms . He used the blanket for late morning naps when hosts of the night had gone off to jobs and proved reluctant to leave him in their small rooms with their few possessions . Mary Jane Lerner knew none of this . ) Her Nicolas lay curled in the sun like a fawn , black hair falling over his eyes . She was telling herself that this might just be her reward at the end of a long meaningful search for truth . This was surely a reunion in art , it was all that poetry promised . That long night with Nicolas and marijuana in Venice had opened her eyes . His advice , his voice saying his poems , the fact that he had not so much as touched her -- on the contrary , he had put his head back and she had stroked his hair -- this was all new . Her eyes had opened , she had caught a glimpse of a new faith . The next day he was gone . Mary Jane might not be the most intelligent woman , but she was one of the most determined . Even so , it took her several days to force Walter to tell her Nicolas's whereabouts . Packing a small suitcase , informing her husband whom she found in Harry's Bar that she was taking a train to Germany to get away for a while , patting his arm , refusing a drink , getting on the train -- all this had only taken her two hours . She had arrived this morning and come straight to the English Gardens . `` Dear girl '' , Walter had finally said , `` he writes me that he is sleeping in the English Gardens '' . `` How like him '' ! ! Mary Jane had smilingly said . `` His address '' , Walter added , `` is that great foundling home , the American Express . And I will greatly appreciate it if you will not tell your husband . '' For the last half hour Mary Jane had criss-crossed half the length of the Gardens and , at last , come upon her knight . His presence there , asleep in the grass , confirmed all that Mary Jane believed it was in his power to teach her : freedom from the tedium of needs such as hotels , the meaning of nature , how to live , simply , with the angels . She set down her suitcase . Should she wake him ? ? No . Smiling , she sat down on the suitcase and waited and watched . The sun grew hotter as it approached the midday . Nicolas was dreaming he had his head pressed against the dashboard of a speeding car . He began sweating . In his dream he cried , `` Slow down , for Chrissake '' ! ! He half woke and rolled over with his face in the cooler grass . His nose was tickled . He sneezed . He blew his nose expertly between his fingers . He spit . He half sat up and scratched at the hair on his forehead and then , more vigorously , between his legs . He belched , he stretched . Mary Jane got up , quietly , and walked away . Twenty minutes later she was at the desk of the Grafin's pension , her tears dried , signing a hotel form and asking for a bath . Mary Jane belonged to a world acquainted with small attractive hotels and pensions in all the major and minor cities . She had retreated to this world . The Grafin , who was charmed by her , told her , `` Your sister who was here two years ago has quite dark hair . Families are very interesting . Nevertheless , there is no bath . But a young American has a bath next to his room and I shall ask him if you might use it this once . And then we shall see . '' ( The Grafin was partial to the word shall . ) Meredith was irritated when the Grafin knocked at his door and told him , `` She is a great beauty ! ! Shall we allow her not to have a bath ? ? Actually , she is a sad beauty , I believe . You shall see her at dinner '' . Rather erotically he listened to the bath water running ; ; when it stopped he began busily typing , sitting up in a virtuous way . Before dinner , he shaved for the second time that day . A thing he did not like doing , generally . Singing into the mirror and his interested eyes , he was pleased to note , when he stripped for his own bath , that he still had the best part of his Italian sun tan . He flexed his muscles for several minutes , got into the tub , and then grew self-conscious of splashing as he washed . In the small gallery used as the guests' dining room , Meredith sat down at his place and , as always , began teasing the young waitress . He was asking had it been she who left the love note in his sheets ( she also served as maid ) when he saw the Grafin followed by a stately blond girl approaching his table . It would be literary license calculated to glamorize life to say that he , oh , dropped his napkin , so startled was he by Mary Jane's beauty . Yet he did drop his badinage with the ordinary country girl as much in deference to the Grafin as acknowledgement that here , indeed , was something special . Mary Jane had made very little effort . Above a dark green skirt she wore a pale green cashmere sweater with , as he soon perceived , no brassiere beneath . Her white blond hair was clean and brushed long straight down to her shoulders . Perhaps her eyes were larger and more of a summer blue for all they had seen and wept that day . She had touched her face , truly a noble and pure face , only with a lip salve which made her lips glisten but no redder than usual . The result was grace and modesty . As she was rather tired this evening , her simple `` Thank you for the use of your bath '' -- when she sat down opposite him -- spoken in a low voice , came across with coolnesses of intelligence and control . Meredith began falling in love . Soup : `` Only this morning '' ; ; veal cutlets : `` Oh , I couldn't possibly eat all this '' ! ! ; ; Wine : `` Then you were typing poems this afternoon '' ? ? ; ; Fruit compote : `` If you think I would understand it '' ; ; a smile . `` What a beautiful room . Like as if it were built of books '' . Having opened the windows onto the terrace , lit the fire , translated the motto , Meredith grinned and took down a little triplet of books bound together in old calfskin . Opening these he brought out a schnapps bottle and small gold thimble-sized glasses hidden inside it . `` I think the maids tipple in the afternoon '' . `` Those sweet girls ? ? Oh you're joking . It tastes a little like poppyseed . What's its name ? ? Steinhager '' She whispered Steinhager to herself , several times , memorizing it . `` Would you first read the poem aloud to me and then let me read it to myself '' ? ? Meredith's voice was always deep , with rough bass notes in it ; ; in reading , on platforms , even in the large auditorium of the Y.M.H.A. , Poetry Center nights , his voice was intimate , thoughtful , and a trifle shy . His new poem , a love poem , told of a young husband leading his wife upstairs to the bedroom when the lights in the house have failed . The husband points the steps out with his flashlight : `` Its white stare filling her pale eyes To the blind brim with appetite , Bleaching her hands that grazed my thighs And sent us from the table in surprise To let the dishes soak all night , '' ( Mary Jane asked herself if Meredith was blushing at this line , or was it the fire ? ? ) But he read on . In the bedroom before the husband and wife find their way to the bed , the lights go on : `` In dull domestic radiance I watch her staring face , still blind , Start wincing in obedience To dirty waters , counters , pots and pans , Waiting below stairs , in her mind '' . Mary Jane took the page from him and began reading it , moving her lips with the words . `` Oh , it's that myth , about Orpheus and What is her name ? ? I can never pronounce it '' . She repeated `` Eurydice '' . The third time rather urgently . But with her hand poem again . She raised her face and nodded , `` It's sweet , and very sad '' . They discussed the way people never tell each other the things on their minds . They finished the small bottle of Steinhager . She confessed she was unhappy , he asked was it her husband ? ? She began to explain , `` There was this poet , in Italy '' He interrupted , `` Please don't judge all poets '' . They smiled . At her door , two or three hours later , Mary Jane whispered , `` Everyone is asleep '' . Kissing her he whispered , several times , `` Eurydice '' . The third time rather urgently . But with her hand softly on his cheek for a last moment , she closed the door and he went back down the hall and into his bed excited , expectant , and finally faintly grinning with the feel of her hand against his mouth . They were west of the Sabine , but only God knew where . For three days , their stolid oxen had plodded up a blazing valley as flat and featureless as a dead sea . Molten glare singed their eyelids an angry crimson ; ; suffocating air sapped their strength and strained their nerves to snapping ; ; dust choked their throats and lay like acid in their lungs . And the valley stretched endlessly out ahead , scorched and baked and writhing in its heat , until it vanished into the throbbing wall of fiery orange brown haze . Ben Prime extended his high-stepped stride until he could lay his goad across the noses of the oxen . `` Hoa-whup '' ! ! He commanded from his raw throat , and felt the pain of movement in his cracked , black burned lips . He removed his hat to let the trapped sweat cut rivulets through the dust film upon his gaunt face . He spat . The dust-thick saliva came from his mouth like balled cotton . He moved back to the wheel and stood there blowing , grasping the top of a spoke to still the trembling of his played-out limbs . The burning air dried his sweat-soaked clothes in salt-edged patches . He cleared his throat and wet his lips . As cheerfully as possible , he said , `` Well , I guess we could all do with a little drink '' . He unlashed the dipper and drew water from a barrel . They could no longer afford the luxury of the canvas sweat bag that cooled it by evaporation . The water was warm and stale and had a brackish taste . But it was water . Thank the Lord , they still had water ! ! He cleansed his mouth with a small quantity . He took a long but carefully controlled draught . He replenished the dipper and handed it to his young wife riding the hurricane deck . She took it grudgingly , her dark eyes baleful as they met his . She drank and pushed back her gingham bonnet to wet a kerchief and wipe her face . She set the dipper on the edge of the deck , leaving it for him to stretch after it while she looked on scornfully . `` What happens when there's no more water '' ? ? She asked smolderingly . She was like charcoal , he thought -- dark , opaque , explosive . Her thick hair was the color and texture of charcoal . Her temper sparked like charcoal when it first lights up . And all the time , she had the heat of hatred in her , like charcoal that is burning on its under side , but not visibly . A ripple ran through the muscles of his jaws , but he kept control upon his voice . `` There must be some water under there '' . He tilted his homely face toward the dry bed of the river . `` We can get it if we dig '' , he said patiently . `` And add fever to our troubles '' ? ? She scoffed . `` Or do you want to see if I can stand fever , too '' ? ? `` We can boil it '' , he said . Her chin sharpened . `` We're lost and burning up already '' , she bit out tensely . `` The tires are rattling on the wheels now . They'll roll off in another day . There was no valley like this on your map . You don't even know where we're headed '' . `` Hettie '' , he said as gently as he could , `` we're still headed west . Somewhere , we'll hit a trail '' . `` Somewhere ! ! '' She repeated . `` Maybe in time to make a cross and dig our graves '' . His wide mouth compressed . In a way , he couldn't blame her . He had picked out this pathless trail , instead of the common one , in a moment of romantic fancy , to give them privacy on their honeymoon . It had been a mistake , but anything would have been a mistake , as it turned out . It wasn't the roughness and crudity and discomfort of the trip that had frightened her . She had hated the whole idea before they started . Actually , she had hated him before she ever saw him . It had been five days too late before he learned that she'd gone through the wedding ceremony in a semitrance of laudanum , administered by her mother . The bitterness of their wedding night still ripped within him like an open wound . She had jumped away from his shy touch like a cat confronted by a sidewinder . He had left her inviolate , thinking familiarity would gentle her in time . But each mile westward , she had hated him the deeper . He stared at the dipper , turning it over and over in his wide , calloused hands . `` I suppose '' , he muttered , `` I can sell the outfit for enough to send you home to your folks , once we find a settlement '' . `` Don't try to be noble '' ! ! Her laugh was hard . `` They wouldn't have sold me in the first place if there'd been food enough to go around '' . He winced . `` Hettie , they didn't sell you '' , he said miserably . `` They knew I was a good sharecrop farmer back in Carolina , but out West was a chance to build a real farm of our own . They thought it would be a chance for you to make a life out where nobody will be thought any better than the next except for just what's inside of them . Without money or property , what would you have had at Baton Rouge '' ? ? `` I might have starved , but at least I wouldn't be fried to a crisp and soaked with dirt '' ! ! He darkened under his heavy burn . His blue eyes sought the shimmering sea of haze ahead . To his puzzlement , there suddenly was no haze . The valley lay clear , and open to the eye , right up to the sharp-limbed line of gaunt , scoured hills that formed the horizon twenty miles ahead . Then he noticed the clouds racing upon them -- heavy , ominous , leaden clouds that formed even as they sliced over the crests of the surrounding hills . He had never seen clouds like them before , but he had the primitive feel of danger that gripped a man before a hurricane in Carolina . He hollered hoarsely , `` Hang on '' ! ! And goaded the oxen as he yelled . He wanted to turn them , putting the wagon against the storm . Too late , he realized that in turning , he had wheeled them onto a patch of sandy ground , instead of atop a grade or ridge . He swung up over the wheel . `` You had better get inside '' , he warned her . But she sat on in stubborn silence . The clouds bulged downward and burst suddenly into a great black funnel . Frozen , they stared at it whirling down the valley , gouging and spitting out boulders and chunks of earth like a starving hound dog cracking marrowbones . The six-ton Conestoga began to whip and shake . Their world turned black . It was filled with dust and wind and sound and violence . The heavens opened , pelting them with hail the size of walnuts . And then came the water -- not rain , but solid sheets that sluiced down like water slopping from a bucket . Walls of water rushed down the slopes and filled the hollows like the crests of flash floods . Through the splash of the rising waters , they could hear the roar of the river as it raged through its canyon , gnashing big chunks out of the banks . The jetting , frothing surface of the river reached the level of the runoff . The dangerous current upon the prairie ceased , but the water stood and kept on rising . They cringed under sodden covers , listening to the waves slop against the bottom . The cloudburst cut off abruptly . They were engulfed by the weird silence , broken only by the low , angry murmur of the river . Then the darkness thinned , and there was light again , and then bright sunlight . Beaten with fear and sound and wet and chill , they crawled to the hurricane deck and looked out haggardly at a world of water that reached clear to the surrounding hills . The water level was higher than their hubs . Only the heavy bones of the oxen kept them anchored . There was no real sign of the river now , just a roiling , oily ribbon of liquid movement through muddy waters that reached everywhere . Clumps of brush rode down the ribbon . Now and then , the glistening side of a half-swamped object showed as it swept past . The girl crawled out into the renewing warmth of the sunshine , hugging her shoulders and still trembling . Her face was pale but set and her dark eyes smoldered with blame for Ben . Out of compulsion to say something cheery , Ben Prime blurted , `` Well , we were lucky to be on soft ground when the first floodheads hit . At least , the wheels dug in . The soaking will put life back in the wagon , too '' . His wife didn't give a sign she'd heard . She was watching a tree ride wildly down that roiling current . Somebody was riding the tree . It raced closer and they could see a woman with white hair , sitting astride an upright branch . She did not call out . But as the tree passed , she lifted an arm in gesture of better luck and farewell . They watched the tree until it twisted sharply on a bend . It speared up into the air , then sinking back , the up-jutting branch turned slowly . The pale blob of the woman disappeared . `` There's the one who's lucky '' ! ! The girl murmured harshly . Ben's eyes strained with the bitter hurt , his homely face slashed with gray and crimson . Then he took off his wet boots and dropped down into the water to talk with the beasts , needing their comfort more than they needed his . It was nearly sundown and he went to the back of the wagon , half-swimming his way , for he was not a tall man . He let down the tailgate and was knocked over by the sluice of water . He sputtered back to his feet and scrambled madly to pull his bags of seed grain forward . They were already swollen to bursting . Of all their worldly belongings , next to the oxen and his gun , the seed grain had been the most treasured . It was spoiled now for seed , and it would sour and mold in three days if they failed to find a place and fuel to dry it . The oxen might as well enjoy it . He examined the water marks on the iron tires when the animals were finished . The waters lay muddy but placid , without a ripple of movement against the wheels ; ; there was not a match-width of damp mark to show they were receding . He doubted if a man could wade as far as the desolate , dry hills that rimmed the valley . A terrible , numbing sense of futility swept over him . He gripped the wheel hard to fight the despondency of defeat . Then he noticed that the dry wood of the wheels had swollen . The spokes were tight again , the iron tires gripped onto the wheels as if of one piece . Hope surged within him . He swung toward the front to give the news to Hettie , then stopped , barred from her by the vehemence of her blame and hate . Still , he felt better . A tight wagon meant so much . He got a small fire started and put on bacon and coffee . He poured the water off the sourdough and off the flour , salvaging the chunky , watery messes for biscuits of a sort . Their jams and jellies had not suffered . He found a jar of preserved tomatoes and one of eggs that they had meant to save . Now he broke them open , hoping a good meal might lessen this depression crushing Hettie . His long nose wiggled at the smells of frizzling bacon and heating java , but the fire was low , and he wanted to waste no time . He furled the slashed sides of the canvas tarpaulins , leaving the ribs and wagon open . He looked thoughtfully at his wife's trunk , holding her meager treasures . He said hesitantly , `` Hettie , I don't figure your things got wet too much . That's a good trunk . If you want to get them aired '' She said without turning her head , `` After that rain beating in atop the dust , there isn't a thing that won't be streaked '' . He drew a long breath and opened the trunk and hung out her clothes and spoilables upon the wagon ribs . Sulphur , oil , and copra make the kind of tinder any firebug dreams of . I suppose a Lascar sailor had sneaked a cigarette in the hold and touched off the blaze . Now , roaring up in great oily clouds of smoke and flames , the fierce heat quickly drove us to the stern where we huddled like suffocating sheep , not knowing what to do . The lifeboats were stuck fast . We couldn't budge them . I heard a cry from a stoker as a pillar of flame leaped from a hatch and tongued the man's bare back . He sprinted to the rail and leaped overboard into the shark-infested waters . One especially bad detonation shook Lifeboat No. 3 which trembled violently in the davits . Brassnose yelled : `` Come on , Sommers , Max step on it , we got a chance now . Heave on those ropes ; ; the boat's come unstuck '' . We pulled and swore and yanked and wept , scraping our hands until they bled profusely . The Bonaventure was quivering and lurching like an old spavined mare . Her stern was down and a sharp list helped us to cut loose the lifeboat which dropped heavily into the water . Brassnose , Max and I leaped into the sea and swam to the boat . `` Let's get away fast '' , said Brassnose , shaking water from his mop of bleached hair . `` That tub is going to explode all at once '' . Then the Bonaventure seemed to disintegrate with a roar of live steam , geysers of sparks and flames , and a dense cloud of black-and-orange smoke . Dimly , we heard the voices of men in mortal agony but we couldn't go back into that inferno . Already our leaky lifeboat was filled with five inches of water . `` Sommers , you bale while we row '' , Brassnose commanded . As best as I could determine , we were some 700 miles west of New Guinea , in the Bismark Archipelago . Three days previously , we had steamed past barren Rennell Island in the distance . Now we peered anxiously for any speck of land in the Pacific , for this interminable bailing would have to stop soon . There were gigantic blisters and rope burns on our hands ; ; our muscles were hot wires of pain . Brassnose was strangely silent . The big man with the whitened hair murmured something : his words sounded as if they were in the Manu tongue , which I recognized , having studied the dialect in my Anthropology 6 , class at the University of Chicago . He then said something which struck a chord in my memory . `` God help us if we're near the island of Eromonga . We'd be in real trouble then . I'd rather keep bailing -- or sink '' . I was puzzled by the remark , then I recalled the voice of mild Professor Howard Griggs three years ago in a university lecture on primitive societies . He had been speaking of this archipelago : `` Even when the islands were under German mandate before World War 1 , , Europeans gave Eromonga a wide berth . The place is inhabited by several hundred warlike women who are anachronisms of the Twentieth Century -- stone age amazons who live in an all-female , matriarchal society which is self-sufficient '' . I remembered , too , the jesting voice of a classmate , Bobby Pauson : `` But how do they reproduce , Dr. Griggs ? ? I'm sure that males have something to do with that process '' ! ! There had been classroom guffaws which quickly subsided as Professor Griggs said dryly : `` I see your point , Pauson . Of course , males play a role there , but believe me when I say you wouldn't enjoy yourself one bit on Eromonga . Indeed , you wouldn't live long , for the females either drive the men they've seized from neighboring islands back to their boats after exploiting them for amatory purposes , or they destroy them by revolting but ingenious methods . In fact , one important aspect of their very religion is the annihilation of men '' . `` I think I know what you mean , Brassnose '' , I said . `` I know something about Eromonga . Let's hope we come to a safer place '' . But we didn't . Three hours later , while we were bailing desperately , a dot of land came into view . Foster Lukuklu Frayne made a sign over his heart with his two linked thumbs : I recognized it as an ancient Manu gesture intended to propitiate the Devil . A half-hour passed ; ; we had drifted closer . In a voice so frightened as to seem not his own , the big bo'sun's mate quavered : `` Tchalo ! ! It is Eromonga -- look hard , you can see with your naked eye the wooden scaffolding on the cliff '' . I squinted at the looming shoreline . There was a wooden tower or derrick there , something like a ski jump ; ; it was perhaps 80 feet high and had been artfully constructed of logs . A fine example of engineering in a primitive society . `` What is the scaffolding for , Brassnose '' ? ? He made a sound of despair deep in his throat . It was embarrassing to see strapping , blonde Brassnose comport himself like a child who talks about bogeymen . `` Aaa-ee ! ! It is their tultul , the ' jumping platform ' of death . It is the last of the three tests of manhood which the women impose , to discover if a male is worthy of survival there . Often , I heard my uncles and cousins speak of it when I was a small boy growing up in Rabaul . They had never seen a tultul but they had heard about it from their fathers '' . Our lifeboat was filling rapidly and despite what I had heard of the inhabitants of Eromonga , I was glad to see a long and graceful outrigger manned by three bronzed girls glide out of a lagoon into the open sea and toward our craft . I expected Brassnose -- as a man with a strain of Melanesian in his blood -- to speak to them . But he had turned a sickly green and appeared tongue-tied or panicked . So , I mustered my few words of the Manu dialect and said , `` We greet you in peace . In ngandlu . My friends and I come from a ship which was destroyed by fire . We are thirsty and hungry ; ; our sore and burned hands and arms need attention '' . The girl in the prow of the outrigger turned a smile like a beacon on me . I noted that her full breasts were bare and that she wore a garland of red pandanus fruit in her blue-black hair . She said , `` My name is Songau and these girls are Ponkob and Piwen . You are welcome to Eromonga . My people await you on the shore . You shall have food , water and rest '' . Thirty minutes later , the outrigger grated on sand and other girls , waiting on shore , rushed forward to pull it up on the beach and make it fast with vine ropes to a large boulder . I saw a dozen or so other outriggers moored there . I looked . All my rosy visions of rest and even pleasure on this island vanished at the sight . There was a mound of bleached human bones and skulls at the base of the big wooden derrick . Some had been there for years ; ; others still had whitened shreds of decayed flesh sticking to them . There was one object which sickened yet fascinated me . This was also a corpse -- a male , judging from the coral arm bands , the tribal scars still discernible on the maggoty face , the painted bone of the warrior caste which still pierced the septum of the rotting nose . The body may have been two or three weeks' dead . I looked with revulsion at the legs . They were shattered . Many small bones protruded crazily from the shreds of flesh . The man must have leaped to his death from the topmost rung of the tultul . As if divining my thoughts , the girl Songau smiled warmly and said in the casual tone an American woman might use in describing her rose garden : `` This is our tultul , a jumping platform , aku . Later , you shall know it better . Is it not well-made ? ? Our old one blew down in a storm at the time of the pokeneu festival fifteen moons ago . It took thirty of our women almost six moons to build this one , which is higher and stronger than the old one . We are very proud of it '' . `` You have every right to be '' , I replied gravely in the Manu dialect , but my attention was fixed on Brassnose , the biggest and strongest of us . He looked as if he was going to keel over . I felt a queasiness in my own stomach but it wouldn't do to show these girls that we were afraid . Not so soon , anyway . I clapped the big man with the bleached hair on his shoulder and said heartily , hoping it would make an impression on the women : `` This one is the maku Frayne . He speaks your language too , for he is the grandson of a chieftain on Taui who made much magic and was strong and cunning . The maku Frayne has inherited this strength from his grandfather '' . This was the worst thing I could have said . Brassnose turned a stricken face toward me and said brokenly , `` Sommers , you meddling Yank , you're a fool ! ! They despise males who brag of their strength ; ; they destroy such men with their damned tests . You've ruined me , blast you '' ! ! At first , I thought he was out of his head , talking wildly like this . But a glance at Songau and the other women confirmed what Brassnose had blurted out . The women's faces had hardened after my statement . At a nod from Songau , four lithe and muscular girls darted to Frayne's side and seized him by the arms . The man was an ox and he put up a creditable struggle ; ; but four Eromonga women are more than a match for the strongest male that ever lived . Besides , terror had sapped some of Frayne's vitality and will . My last impression as they led him off to a stockade was of his pale face . In the Manu tongue , `` eromonga '' means manhood -- a quality which the women derisively toasted in weekly feasts at which great quantities of a brew like kava were imbibed . In the hut to which I was assigned -- Max had his own quarters -- my food was brought to me by a wrinkled crone with bare drooping breasts who seemed to enjoy conversing with me in rudimentary phrases . Her name was L'Turu and she told me many things . For an anthropologist , loquacious old L'Turu was a mine of information . Though I had a great dread of the island and felt I would never leave it alive , I eagerly wrote down everything she told me about its women . ( Her account was later confirmed by the Scobee-Frazier Expedition from the University of Manitoba in 1951 . ) From L'Turu , I heard that until about 1850 the people of this island -- which was about the size of Guam or smaller -- had been of both sexes , and that the normal family life of Melanesian tribes was observed here with minor variations . But in the middle of the last century an island woman named `` Karipo '' seized a spear in the heat of an inter-tribal battle and rallied the women after their men had fled . Miraculously , Karipo and her women had succeeded in driving a hundred invaders from the isle of Pamasu back to their war canoes , after considerable loss of life on both sides . Karipo was something of a politician as well as a militarist . She quickly exploited the exalted position she now occupied , by harassing the disorganized males and even putting many of them to death . Within a decade or less , few men were left and a feminist society had sprung up . `` Karipo was great goddess , told our mothers that men were not necessary except to father children '' , the crone told me . `` All men went away from here . Those who stayed had to pass tests . Few passed '' . She cackled with mirth , showing the stumps of betel-stained teeth . `` Karipo's women then named this place ' Eromonga ' -- manhood -- for just the strongest men could stay here . Come , I show you '' . The old woman arose stiffly and led me to a clearing where a small hut stood . In the shade of a palm tree in front of the squalid dwelling I saw four figures in a semi-circle on the ground . `` I guess he spent the morning getting himself all organized , then headed for home . Maybe to beat up on his squaw '' . Benson looked up and saw Ramey's long head tilt forward to rub his chin on the stiff edge of the overall bib . Ramey reached out with the tire iron and dislodged a chunk of mud that was caked on the spare tire rack . `` I'd like to know just which it is that those guys don't understand , the liquor or automobiles '' . Somehow the thought of a simple man bewildered by things no one had ever really helped him understand moved the driver . For a moment his hatred toward drunken or careless drivers softened . Maybe the Indian wasn't too much at fault , Ramey thought . Maybe he was only doing the best he knew how , like any of us . Anyway , he doesn't deserve to lie there in the sun and be stared at . `` Ever see yourself spread out on the pavement , Benny '' ? ? He said to his partner . `` You mean dream '' ? ? `` Not exactly . Just see it '' . Benson grinned and flipped a rock with his thumb like a marble . `` Nope , just you , all the time -- sometimes I think it's the only way I'll ever get a decent partner '' . Ramey smiled but he thought to himself , I always see me too . Never Benny . Whenever he saw someone lying in the dirt , Ramey wondered what the person had been thinking and he would try out thoughts in his own mind . Then he would realize they were really things that only he himself could think . With this realization , sometimes , he saw himself as he looked down . `` You seen him yet '' ? ? Benson said , referring to the Indian . `` He wasn't in the car '' , Ramey said . `` You didn't go clear around '' , Benson said . `` If you want to see something , he's back on the other side by the trunk of the car '' . `` Too long a waiting line '' , Ramey answered , pretending to joke . A few minutes later the insurance man , a road checker , drove up in the gray coupe with license plates on it from a far-away state . It was a trick they used to try and conceal their identity when they followed trucks to check their speed . Sometimes they just parked at the side of the road and used radar on the trucks as they passed . All the drivers knew about the plates and they also knew about the big floppy straw hat with shredded edges , the kind natives in travel ads wear when they are out joyfully chopping cane . Horsely , an agent on the east end , wore the hat , trying to look like a tourist . It had always seemed strange to Ramey that to disguise himself as a tourist , an ex-truck driver like Horsely would merely pick something outlandish and put it on his head . The insurance man informed them that he had talked to Crumley who was all right and that he would watch the men's personal effects until they towed the rig back to town . He chatted with Ramey and Benson for a minute or so in the meager shade of the trailer . Every so often the diminishing sound of a car came under the trailer as it slowed down for the wreck then speeded up again as it got clear . When they were ready to leave , Benson and Ramey walked back around the rear of the trailer . `` There's a body you won't mind looking at '' , Benson said and they stopped . She had driven up with her husband in a convertible with Eastern license plates , although the two drivers knew nothing at the moment about that . She wore shorts and a loose terry-cloth shirt . Slender and tanned , her dark brown hair was drawn straight back , simply . `` What outfit does she drive for '' ? ? Benson said . Seeing her caused a lurch in Ramey , a recognition . She might have been someone he had once loved . He had never seen her before , but now he thought of the manner in which he and Benson went in and out of the cities , at each end of their run . The truck routes , the industrial areas with walls grimed with diesel smoke passed briefly through his mind -- back alleys were their access to a city and they could never stay . How would you ever see her again ? ? The feeling subsided , it was only a small yearning . Their work was lonely . `` What's she doing in this bunch '' ? ? Benson said , and Ramey wondered how close their thoughts might have been . The girl looked around at the countryside . Her glance swung past the trailer where the two drivers were standing . It made only a tiny bump over the two men like a tire over a piece of gravel then moved on . She began to watch a blonde-haired man , also in shorts , standing right at the rear of the wrecked car in the one spot that most of the crowd had detoured slightly . What had caught his attention was obscured by the car itself , so that neither the girl nor the truck drivers could see , but Benson knew what it was . The girl took a couple of steps toward the man in shorts when Benson , in that barefoot courtliness Ramey could never decide was real , said , `` You don't want to go around there , Ma'am '' . The girl stopped but did not turn her head or acknowledge that someone had spoken to her . The man stood near the bent levi-clad body of the Indian who lay face down almost under the car . The two drivers moved closer . `` What does he want , a spoon '' ? ? Benson said to Ramey . One tiny detail in a happening can clog the memory and stick like meat in a crooked tooth , while the rest of the occurrence will go hazy and uncertain . With Ramey it was a dusty work shoe that was half-off the Indian's foot that he would always remember . The laces were broken at the bottom of the eyelets but there was still a bow knot at the top . The slightest twitch would have parted the shoe entirely from the foot , yet the toes were still inside . The two men in overalls stood just behind the blonde-headed man . He wore tennis shorts and a white sweater with a red V at the neck , the sleeves pushed above the elbows . He turned and looked at them with clear blue eyes , immaculate eyes . He was very tanned -- big hands might have torn him from a Coca-Cola poster . `` He's dead , isn't he '' ? ? The man said . He turned and bent over the body of the Indian . There was nothing in particular on the man's face . It was simply a matter of curiosity , a natural right to examine . `` What's this '' ? ? The man said , backing up a step , still looking down . His words were mostly to himself . `` Don't '' . There was a gentle concern in Benson's voice . Ramey looked down and saw the white sneaker at the bottom of the man's tanned leg cautiously nudge a bit of folded , blood-flecked substance lying by itself on the pavement . `` But what is it '' ? ? The man said with a tone of impatience . But what is it ? ? The man had spoken only once . Ramey heard the words again inside , weakened , the way moving water sounds through a grove of trees , until he was not sure whether it was sound or light-headedness pressing in his ears . The sneaker reached out once more to tap against the mass and Ramey's vision darkened except for an unreasonable clarity of the man's leg . Ramey saw sunlight touch the curly blonde hairs on the brown skin . He stared at the shining , shining circles of hairs and heard the voice of his partner through trees , `` Don't do that , fella . Them's brains '' . The man seemed to sink a little as Ramey brought the tire iron down on his shoulder and it seemed that the blonde head was turning as he hit the man again , with his fist . Ramey swung and caught the man just to the left of his mouth . It was a straight , solid , once-in-a-lifetime shot ; ; he laid all four knuckles in between the man's cheekbone and his chin . Ramey's fist and the air expelled from the man's collapsing cheek made a hollow pop in the air like cupped hands clapping together . The man took two short steps backward then sat down heavily on the pavement . Ramey heard a cry from the girl and felt a slight pain somewhere in his hand . As he watched the man sit suddenly , a detached part of his mind observed how very difficult it was , really , to knock a man off his feet . He hadn't done it this time and he would never again hit anyone so hard . With a thoughtful look , the man sat on the pavement , legs straight out in front of him . His arms hung like empty shirt sleeves , and his mouth was slightly open . After what seemed several seconds , the open mouth grew dark inside then blood began to ooze from it . The man brought one hand up slowly and the fingers fumbled across his face until he touched his mouth . He moaned and pulled the hand away . Even yet there was no realization in his eyes . Ramey could hear the crowd coming up rapidly behind him and the questioning voices coming over his shoulder had no identity or importance to him . He did not look around . `` What happened '' ? ? Someone said . `` He's hurt '' ! ! A woman's voice said , and then he heard a sort of wail from the man's wife . The man on the ground began to move ; ; one of his hands flattened out on the pavement and supported him . Blood dripped down the front of his sweater , soaking into a dark streak of dirt that ran diagonally across the white wool on his shoulder , as though the bright V woven into the neckline had melted , running a darker color . The girl kneeled by her husband with one arm at his back . `` Can you hear , can you talk to me '' ? ? She begged . An incoherent , puzzled sound came from the red mouth . The girl looked around quickly at several of the people . None of the crowd had stepped forward to help . Then she saw Ramey and her face was misshapen with bewilderment . `` Why did you do it -- why did you hit him '' ? ? She said , her voice rising . Ramey said nothing . A shine in her eyes suddenly became tears and she turned back to her husband again . Behind Ramey feet scraped beneath sharp questioning whispers . No one seemed to know for sure what had happened , nor was there any purpose or responsibility in the muttering feet and urgent voices behind the driver , beyond finding out . Ramey looked around and caught sight of his partner near the front end of the wrecked truck talking to the patrolman . Benson moved his arms , gesturing with an unfamiliar vigor and talking rapidly . Ramey caught a glimpse of the insurance man . Some of the ruddiness was gone from his face and he stared at Ramey . It's all over now , the driver thought as he saw the patrolman turn and walk rapidly down along the trailer toward them . Ramey watched him coming with a vision as clean as the glare on the metal sides of the trailer . He saw the dark sweat spots flip in and out of sight under the patrolman's swinging arms and in the leather holster that swaggered and rolled at the side of his stocky body , the sun left a smoky shine on the narrow strip of blue metal that ran between the horned handles of his pistol . `` All right , step back '' ! ! The patrolman said to no one in particular as he pushed between the fat man in the baseball cap and a young boy in levis . He walked straight up to the man sitting on the ground and bent over to look at him . `` You all right '' ? ? `` Mough -- it's my mough '' , the man said , trying to talk without moving his lips . His brown face looked gray from dirt streaks where his hand had come off the dusty pavement and rubbed across it . Then he calmly and carefully slugged the remaining five shots into the venomous head -- caught in the wicker back of the chair , the eyes dead on him as the life finally went out of the brute . The body continued to lash , but now Keith used the legs of the chair to fork the loathsome , bloody mass out of the bungalow . He slammed the door and listened as his servants ran up , alarmed at the sound of the shots . He heard their chattering , and then the sounds of hacking as they dismembered the snake right on the porch with wood axes . It was only then that he turned to look at Penny . She was sitting on the edge of the bed again , back in the same position where the snake had found her . The fear had not entirely gone from her face , but there were some other emotions now , crowding into her eyes and the lines of her mouth . But her hands were calm , now . She's got guts , thought Keith . She's got more guts than any other woman in the world . `` Keith '' , said Penny , `` Keith , you were wonderful . I don't suppose a wife should be grateful to her husband for saving her life , but I am . Thank you , Keith '' . He smiled at her sincerity . And for the hundredth time that week , he was startled at her beauty . Strange . Seven years they'd been married . He knew her mind pretty well , by now , its quick perceptions and sympathies , its painful insistence on truth and directness , its capacity for love almost too deep for a man to reciprocate , even in part . But her beauty always surprised him anew . `` I realize that this is hardly the time to say it , Penny '' , said Keith . `` But knowing you , I know that you're glad to be alive , and grateful -- and sorry because I killed the snake , even though I had to . Isn't that so '' ? ? Penny lowered her eyes . `` Yes '' , she said , almost in a whisper , as if admitting to a crime . `` The snake was beautiful , wasn't it '' ? ? Asked Keith , his voice getting harsher in spite of himself , as he struggled to control his growing anger . `` It was a king cobra , the largest you ever saw , and it deserved to live out its life in the jungle , didn't it ? ? didn't it ? ? '' Penny did not answer . Now , she just sat there looking at him , without an expression except concern for him . `` We're all God's creatures , aren't we '' ? ? Keith was snarling now . `` All of us -- every goddam roach and worm and killer in that jungle . You love this village and these stinking brown people because they're God's creatures , too . And you love Ahmiri , that black bastard of a servant even a little more , because he's a beautiful man . And he loves you because you're a beautiful woman . We're all God's creatures , aren't we , Penny ? ? All of us , that is , except me . You hate me , you hate my guts , because I like to hunt . You actually hate me -- and we both know it -- because I killed that filthy snake . Well , why don't you say something '' ? ? Penny would not rise to his mood . `` There isn't anything left to say , is there , Keith '' ? ? She softly let herself into the bed , and took her regular side , away from the door , where she slept better because Keith was between her and the invader . He knew she was not sulking , not even angry at him . Just as he knew that she had stopped loving him . The Brahmaputra has its headwaters in the tableland of the world , the towering white headwalls of the Himalayas that are unknown to man as any other space on the planet . For a brief period each year , the rays of the sun are warm enough to melt some of the snows piled a mile deep at the base of the headwalls , and then the pinnacles glisten in the daytime at high noon , and billions of gallons of water begin their slow seepage under the glaciers and across the rockstrewn hanging valleys on their long , meandering journey to the sea -- running east past the sky-carving massifs of Gurla Mandhata and Kemchenjunga , then turning south and curling down through the jungles of Assam , past the Khasi Hills , and into Bengal , past Sirinjani and Madaripur , until the hard water of the melting snows mingles with the soft drainage of fields and at length fans out to meld with the teeming salt depths of the Bay of Bengal . Keith Sterling had looked down on the Brahmaputra more times than he could remember , during the war days when he flew over the Hump of the world , thinking it high adventure in those times before man was guiding himself through outer space . But Keith looked down more than up . He thought of the jungles below him , and of the wild , strange , untracked beauty there and he promised himself that someday he would return , on foot perhaps , to hunt in this last corner of the world where man is sometimes himself the hunted , and animals the lords . At first it had been just a romantic dream of his , the same as the idea of finishing Oxford after the war . But `` after the war '' was a luxury of a phrase he did not permit himself . Wing Commanders in the RAF do not imply survival in the future either in their orders or in their attitudes , to their men or to themselves . And Keith's record of kills made him a man to listen to -- a man paradoxically , who might even survive . He became a fighter pilot after the stint over the Hump in the big crates . The RAF was Britain's weapon of attrition , and flying a fighter plane was the way her sons could serve her best at this point in the war . He knew how to shoot down Nazis . And he knew that the men talked about him behind his back , saying that he was one up on everybody else -- including the pilot of the plane with the swastika on it -- because he was chemically incapable of fear . That was true , but only half the truth . The other half he didn't like to recognize , even to himself . He enjoyed the killing . Not defending England , or being an ace , or fighting for humanity . He enjoyed killing . And he would have enjoyed it just as much if he had been a Nazi . Nowadays , we talk as though the blitz were just a short skirmish . The Nazis bombed Britain , so the RAF retaliated and shot them all down . Not quite . It was a war of nerves , of stamina , of dogged endurance in which the stupid insistence of the British on their right to their own country became ultimately an unsurmountable obstacle to the Nazis , who were better organized and technically superior . It took a long time before the British tipped the balance . Keith learned too much about air combat , and air killing , to be risked . They grounded him ( over his protests -- not including his true reason for wanting to fly ) and put him in the Command offices . That was where he met Penny . He was aware of her as a frightfully good-looking American WAC , a second lieutenant assigned to do the paper work , ( regardless of how important she might have thought she was ) in the Command offices , but that was all . Penny knew him better , on her part . He had a war reputation , but this was the kind of man women like even without medals . They don't go for bull-like muscle , as a rule . He had strength in his six-foot frame , but it was like the tensile steel in a rapier . He was on the thin side , with big hands , and the kind of wrists that give away the power in forearm and bicep . His hair was black , already greying at the temples in the classic beauty-idiom , the only one permitted to a man . The pretty little twittering WACS said he had the look of eagles -- and Penny , hating the cliche , had to admit that in this case it applied . Keith was an eagle . Penny and Keith had no romance . No dates or hand-holding . But they met in one searing moment that gave them to one another instantly . The Command offices were in the border country , up north , where the radar systems centralized their intelligence reports , and the fighters were dispatched to harry the enemy . The Nazis knew this , of course , and while their chief quarry was the industrial centers , they let a few drop every time they went over , hoping for a lucky hit . This time , they had been lucky . The Command post was underground , and well camouflaged . But there hadn't been enough time to build it for keeps . There was a measure of protection in its concrete walls and ceiling , but the engineers who hastily installed it were well aware that concrete is not much better than prayer , if as efficacious , when a direct hit comes along . This one was actually more of a `` near miss '' . The bomb plunged into the ground near the Post , but not precisely into the Command room itself . There was a shattering , cracking sound as the concrete started to buckle , the air filled with dust and flying debris , and everyone in the room -- men and women hit the floor and used the desks as turtlebacks , as ordered . That is , everyone but Keith and Penny . They stood there , just the two of them , in the rocking , shattering blast . Keith was on his feet because he didn't care at all about life any more : Penny on her feet , proudly , because she cared too much . The bomb was a solitary one . The blast damaged , but did not destroy the room . Keith's eyes met Penny's as they stood there in this strange marriage of destruction . And , as the others began to crawl out from beneath the desks and tend to those wounded , and mark the several killed , he climbed across the debris to Penny and took her hand in his . The chaplain married them , on the next day . After the war , Penny had wanted Keith at least to visit her home with her . She came from Ohio , from what she called a `` small farm '' of two hundred acres , as indeed it was to farmer-type farmers . But to Keith's London-bred mind , such acreage sounded rather invincible . It wasn't that , however , which decided them not to go to America . Keith told Penny about his dream to return to India and Burma . He stressed the wild beauty of the mountains , and the jungles . He didn't tell her the truth he now freely admitted to himself . He couldn't stop killing . That was his true love , not Penny . The terrible power of a gun , the thing that blasted the soul out of a living body , man or beast , was one he never wanted to lose . And in the hunting land , this hunger was considered to be a noble thing . When they got to Shillong , in Assam , he was happy . This is a paradise for hunters . This was the land of the sladang , the great water buffalo with horns forty inches across the spread . The great black leopards . The sambur buck , the jungle stag that is even more noble than the Scottish elk . He even hunted elephant , although the Asian elephant is not quite as ferocious as his African cousin . But there are big rogues in both countries . These were the ones Keith sought out -- the loners , the ones who killed for the joy of it , like himself . He and Penny would go out on tame elephants , raised from babyhood in the keddah . And while he was ever alert for game , and most particularly a tiger , Penny marvelled at the Eden they were traversing . They came upon cheetal deer at woodland pools . Peacocks strutted across their path , preening . There were fantastic flowers without perfume , and gaudy birds without song . Mouse deer played around the feet of the elephants , or fled when the mighty legs thrashed too close . Wild boar watched their progress with little pig eyes , and grunted derision when they didn't consider such game worthy of a shot from the . Now , the next morning , they were anchored at The Elbow and the boat was riding directly over the underwater ledge where the green water turned to deepest blue and the cliff dropped straight down 600 fathoms , with the weighted line beside it ; ; and Robinson Roy , who had gone down this line ten minutes before to set a new depth record for the free dive , was already back on the surface . He and his safety man , Herr Schaffner , swam up to the boarding ladder together . The German courteously indicated that Robinson should mount first . Robinson clambered heavily into the boat , sat down , and stripped off his triple-tank assembly . He was frowning . He took his mask from his forehead and threw it , unexpectedly , across the deck . `` Temper , temper '' , Mrs. Forsythe said , laughing uneasily . A phony blonde hanging onto a bygone youth and beauty , but irreparably stringy in the neck , she was already working on her second gin and tonic , though it was not yet ten A.M. `` I loused it '' , Rob said , with a savage note in his voice . `` All I have to do to set the record is to go on down . So instead I come up '' . `` Was it my equipment '' ? ? The German asked . `` Was it something went bad with the breathing '' ? ? `` The equipment was fine '' , Rob stated , standing up . He was a huge young man of twenty-four , clothed in muscle , immensely strong , with a habitual gentleness and diffidence of manner that was submerged under his present agitation . He stared stonily at the floor . `` I was down to 275 . I've been that far half a dozen times . I don't get it why this time I should pull such a stupid trick '' . `` Well , I get it '' , Artie said , still on the ladder . `` You are a big muscle-bound ape and you got this idea about setting a record . And you also got this little spark in your bird-brain that tells you to turn around before you drown yourself . So you turn around '' . `` No , it wasn't that '' , Rob said . A note of awe came into his voice . `` When I came up , damnit , I thought I was going down . I came up maybe fifty feet before I knew what was happening '' . `` Pressure-happy '' , Artie said , and climbed in . `` That's right '' , Robinson said . `` I was expecting it , sure . But when it happens to you like that , I tell you , and you're a hundred feet from where you thought you were -- well , it makes you think . You don't head back down again . Not me , anyway . Not right away '' . He had his voice under control again : no one became aware that he was terrified by what had just happened to him . Waddell , the newspaperman , was a fellow in his middle forties , with a graying crewcut , heavy-framed glasses , and a large jaw padded with fat . Now he was going to show how much he knew . `` Our boy didn't chicken out , no sir . He ran into the rapture of the depths . Nitrogen narcosis . It makes the diver feel drunk '' . `` Well , that's the only way to be '' , Mrs. Forsythe said , and gave her brassy laugh . `` Maybe not , if you're 200 feet under water '' , Artie said . `` Anyway '' , Waddell went on . `` It's nothing to fool with . It can kill you . Personally , I don't blame him for giving up the dive , much as I regret losing the story '' . `` Nobody's giving anything up '' , Robinson said . He stood there , towering over them all : gentle , mighty , determined , the moving force in the group ; ; and yet like a child among adults . `` You think I got you and Artie and Herr Schaffner all the way out here just for the boat ride ? ? I'm going down again '' . `` That's my boy '' ! ! Mr. Forsythe exclaimed . `` Rob's not going to give up as easy as all that '' . He was a florid , puffy man in his early sixties , very natty in his yachting cap , striped jacket and white flannels . He went to Key West every fall and winter and was the only man in town who did not know that his title of `` Commodore '' was never used without irony . Old Commodore Forsythe , who had once lost a fifty-dollar bet on whether he could get both motors started and turn on the running lights without accidentally turning on something else first . Now it did not occur to him even to wonder whether it was wise for Robinson to dive again : Rob was his boy , the kid he had rescued from the streets , the object of his pride . `` Why '' , he went on , `` when Rob asked me if he could make his dive on this trip , I didn't think twice about it . I've helped him along ever since he was a youngster hanging around his brother's tackle shop . Hell , I gave him the first decent job he ever had , six , seven -- how many years ago was it , Rob '' ? ? `` Seven years ago , Commodore '' , Rob said impassively . He was thinking , big deal : skipper on his drunken fishing parties for seven years and no better off than when I started . `` Excuse me '' , he said abruptly . He went down the steps to the galley and sleeping quarters ; ; went into the forward stateroom and locked the door behind him . `` When you gotta go , you gotta go '' , Mrs. Forsythe said . Waddell muttered something about taking a look around and climbed up to the flying bridge . He was disturbed by what had happened on the dive and by what he remembered of a conversation he had had the night before with the German , who had come out of the head while he was fixing himself a drink in the galley . `` Hi there , Schaffner '' , he had said . `` Can I make you one '' ? ? `` No thank you very much '' , Schaffner had answered in his accented English . `` I do not drink so much , thank you '' . Waddell had looked the man over , trying to size him up . He was in his early forties , rather short and very compactly built , and with a manner that was reserved and stiff despite his efforts to adapt himself to American ways . His open face seemed to promise a sort of innocence , until one looked into his eyes , which had no warmth in them but only alert intelligence . Waddell had heard that he had been a commando in Rommel's Afrika Corps , and he said to himself : I'd hate to run into him in the desert on a dark night . Aloud he had said , making conversation : `` Rob tells me he's using your Atlantis equipment on the dive '' . `` Yes '' , Herr Schaffner had said . `` He's one hell of a decent boy . I like that kid '' . `` I agree , yes '' . `` And if the dive goes OK he has the exclusive import rights to your line for this country , is that right '' ? ? `` Well , no '' , Herr Schaffner said . Waddell turned to face him . `` No '' ? ? He asked . `` But that's what he told me . Why , that's his main reason for making the dive '' . Shaffner looked at him , altogether without guile , and shrugged his shoulders , making a little spreading gesture with his two hands . `` What do you mean '' ? ? Waddell asked , frowning . `` Please let me explain '' , the German said earnestly , his face still devoid of deceit . `` I have in Europe a gross business of seven million dollars the year . Now I wish to enter the American market , where the competition is very strong . I must have a powerful representative here , a firm with a national distribution and ten , twenty thousand dollars to advertise my products . With all respect to a fine young man , Mr. Roy is not able to provide these necessaries '' . Waddell was not an eminently moral person , but he did not like what he had just heard . `` Did you tell him all this '' ? ? He asked . `` Perhaps not in so many words '' , the German said . `` But surely you have misunderstood Mr. Roy . Never , never did I offer him the exclusive rights . We spoke of the need for advertising , and I agreed that the deep dive would be most useful for publicity . He was most eager to make the dive ; ; of course , I was willing . But there was no definite agreement about business arrangements '' . `` Well , damn '' , Waddell said . There was the end of his front-page feature story , with byline . He started out the door . `` One moment '' ! ! Herr Schaffner said . `` You intend to speak with Mr. Roy '' ? ? `` What else '' ? ? Waddell asked . `` If you will pardon , I think it would be better if not . Mr. Roy is determined to make this dive . Whatever you tell him he will dive . I know this from my talks with him '' . `` Well , let's let him make up his own mind , OK '' ? ? Waddell said . `` On the basis of the facts '' . `` You will make him unhappy and anxious '' , the German said . `` At 200 , 300 , 400 feet under the water , when he must be paying very much attention , he will be thinking about what you are telling him . It is not good , Mr. Waddell : you will do him great harm '' . There was no doubt that Herr Schaffner meant every word of what he said . Waddell came back from the door and sat on a bunk . `` I am an honest man '' , the German said with fervor . `` I will give Mr. Roy his due for this dive . I will make him distributor for all of Florida -- a big market . All tourists come to Florida . This will help him to get out of his little tackle shop . Yes ! ! But there is no use causing him to worry at this time '' . The German's words worked on the newspaperman like a reprieve from an odious duty . He took a big swig of his drink . It would be a colossal shame to throw away a story like this . `` I think maybe you're right , Schaffner '' , he said . `` He has the distributorship for Florida , you say '' ? ? `` Yes '' , the German said . `` At least for South Florida '' . `` By God '' , Waddell said , `` we don't want to upset the boy at this time of all times . I guess you're right '' . He sloshed his drink around and drained it in a few large gulps . The story was shaping up nicely in his mind : the young pioneer , as of old , altruistically braving the unknown ; ; the rewards prompt and juicy in modern big-business America . `` Join me in another '' ? ? He had asked . `` Thank you '' , the German had said courteously . `` I do not drink so much '' . Now , in that same cabin , Robinson fell to his knees beside a bunk . Fear and relief mingled in his churning emotions . He pressed his palms together and addressed himself to the patron saint of divers in a hurried and anxious whisper . `` Blessed Saint Nicholas , I thank thee for getting me out of that mess and sending me up instead of down when I was bewildered . And when I make the dive again '' -- He paused ; ; crossed himself ; ; said a Hail Mary , slowly and with understanding . Folding between his hands the cross that hung from his neck , he took his appeal direct to Headquarters . `` Holy Mary , Mother of God , Star of the Sea , stay Thou with me on this next dive . Make it come off all right . Let me set the record this time , and let me get back OK , so the German will give me the exclusive . And make my life different and better from this time on . Amen '' . He crossed himself again and rose . He felt a good deal less shaky . As he reached for the door there was a knock on it and when he opened he found Artie , who came in and sat down on a bunk . Artie had picked up a snorkle and was twirling it on his forefinger . He waited awhile before he said , `` Roy , you know your decompression table , don't you '' ? ? `` You know I know it '' , Robinson answered warily . `` You came straight up from 275 without a stop '' , Artie said . `` Well , I was a little bit confused . Anyway , I wasn't down long enough to matter . You don't see me stretched out on the deck , do you '' ? ? `` You know what they say about two deep dives in one day '' , Artie went on , still twirling the snorkle and studying it intently . `` I don't think you should go down again '' . Early that day Matsuo saw a marine . The enemy came looming around a bend in the trail and Matsuo took a hasty shot , then fled without knowing the result , ran until breath was a pain in his chest and his legs were rubbery . As his feet slowed , he felt ashamed of the panic and resolved to make a stand . He crossed the next meadow and climbed a tree where the jungle trail resumed . In the leafiest part of the tree , straddling a broad horizontal limb , he could see over the meadow . For a while he was content to let events develop in their good time . He had no doubt the marine was the lead scout of a column , and while his shot had probably bred indecision , they would soon come hunting . His superiors had emphasized that marines tortured others for the sheer pleasure . Yesterday ; ; today ; ; tomorrow : no surrender . His remembering the self-dictate brought no peace -- only a faint chill of doubt . He murmured to himself , with firmness : `` No surrender '' . It was best to die fighting the marines . His superiors had also preached this , saying it was the way for eternal honor . What if the marines never came ? ? His comrades were all dead . He had no rice . Then it would be a choice between starvation and suicide . Whichever the way , he would rot in this vast choking green , his wife never to receive an urn of his ashes . He sighed and leaned for a moment against the trunk . His fingers touched the bone handle of a knife . The knife , an ammunition pouch , and a half-filled bottle of purified water hung on his belt . Besides the belt he wore a loin cloth . As he looked up from picking at a leg ulcer , he saw a marine in the jungle across the clearing . Gloom receded . The marine came to the edge of the green jungle mist and stayed , as though debating whether to brave the sunlight . His fatigues made a streak of almost phosphorescent green in the mist . `` Come out , come out in the meadow '' , Matsuo said under his breath . The man leaned against a tree and wiped a sleeve across his face . A signal ? ? Matsuo lifted his rifle , easing the sling under his left upper arm for steadiness . Fresh on his mind were events of the past day when his whole regiment was destroyed in the hills . They had fought from caves , and the marines resorted to burning them out . Even now , like a ringing in his ears , he heard the wooooosh of flame-throwers squirting great orange billows . A wave of flame rippling through their cave had reached Nagamo , his friend , and with a shriek the man bolted through the entrance , then slowed to the jerky walk of a puppet , his uniform blazing . The marines let him advance . When he sank on his knees , they had allowed him to char without administering the stroke of mercy . Matsuo had faked death and was pitched on a stack of corpses , both the burned and the unburned , the latter decomposing rapidly under the tropical sun . The callous marines had laughed at each other's retching , while stacking bodies . Matsuo repeatedly choked down his own nausea . At nightfall he had been able to sneak down a hillside and into the jungle , reeking of death . Apprehensively he peered to the left , to the right into the leafy , vine-crisscrossed maze . He decided that the marines must be deploying around the meadow , with the one left to distract him . He strained his hearing . Cautious feet stepping on leafmold ; ; faint creaking of belts and slings ; ; whispers : he heard none of these . Only the hum of insects and the distant fluttering call of a bird . Because he couldn't hear them , he was more convinced they were there . A spectacle occurred across the meadow : the lone marine took a seat on the ground ; ; leaning sidewise on a tree trunk , he embraced it . Humiliation made Matsuo tremble . While his comrades cocked the trap , that one behaved as if it was some dull maneuver . Taking aim at the man's face , Matsuo squeezed the trigger up to the point of discharge , and then he changed his mind . He wanted the arrogant marine to know fear , and so he aimed above the head . The shot reverberated in diminishing whiplashes of sound . Hush followed . Like a mischievous boy expecting punishment , Matsuo awaited reaction from the jungle . How stupid to give his position away . The jungle did not retort . The sitter remained seated hugging the tree . Before long the atmosphere reverted to its old normalcy , and insects hummed and birds occasionally called . Matsuo puzzled and grew anxious over the complete passiveness , concluding that he was the butt of a devilish joke . Five or so minutes later the marine abruptly pulled up and stepped into sunlight , immediately throwing his hands over his eyes . He went into a whirling dance , a sort of blind chasing of the tail . It ended when he tumbled ; ; but jumping right up , he staggered in no particular direction . He wore no head cover of any kind and , more odd , had no visible weapon . With a sudden decisiveness he lurched in Matsuo's direction , crossing the meadow in a zigzagging gallop . When he got closer to the tree , Matsuo noted the wild look on his face . The pockets of his jacket bulged . Hand grenades . The bobbing head was a poor target , so Matsuo shot him in the upper trunk . The marine spun , clapping a hand high on his chest , and dived forward . In the hush that followed the echoes , Matsuo was tense . They could come on him now without difficulty . Gradually he reached a conclusion . The marine was alone , for they were impatient people and by now would have vied to knock him from the tree . Down the tree he scrambled and knelt at the edge of foliage . The marine was sprawled some thirty yards away , one arm extended . Matsuo jumped when the hidden arm flopped out . Reflex ? ? Rifle leveled on the man , he made a rush . Heat , in the sunlight , pressed in like an invisible crowd . He squatted by the head , gently placing the rifle on the ground . With a snakestrike motion he grasped the hair , and , twisting , pulled the marine over on his back . He was bearded . The bullet had penetrated in the area of the right collarbone ; ; around the hole , blood glistened in a little patch . Maintaining his clutch on the hair , Matsuo watched the closed eyes while rummaging in the jacket pockets . In one : a package of cigarettes and a tinplated lighter , both sticky from the man's bleeding . In the other : a wristwatch with broken crystal wrapped in a dirty handkerchief . One by one he tossed the objects aside . He didn't smoke and could not light fires with a flintless lighter ; ; he had no use any longer for exact time , even had the watch been running . Then there was no saying how many times the marine had blown his nose on the handkerchief . Too bad the marine had no water . From its holder he took his own canteen . The cap was stuck and made a thin rusty squeaking as he applied pressure . The marine's eyes opened , squeezed shut , then opened squinted in the glare . So , alive . Matsuo put the bottle to his own lips . The marine reached up a hand . Matsuo shook his head . `` None for you '' . The marine blinked , soon dropping his hand . Not only had he no canteen , but he lacked even the belt to hang one on . `` You came well equipped to die '' . Some odor made him lean over the man . He sniffed and recognized it . Sake . So that had been his difficulty . Drunk on sake , he must have wandered off from his bivouac . The marine tried to roll on his right side , and moaned . When he rolled on the left side , propping on his left elbow , Matsuo seized his hair and pulled him back over . `` Be a good turtle '' . Awkwardly with one hand Matsuo got the cap back on the water bottle . The smell of sake had freshened yesterday's events in his thoughts . In the caves , with other supplies , they had kept cases of sake . The marine shut his eyes . `` Are you a thrower of flame , marine '' ? ? Matsuo took the small knife from its scabbard and laid it on the ground , out of the marine's reach and away from their shadows . He waited in his squat , gripping the hair . Every so often he turned the knife . Its blade was dazzling in the intense sunlight . The sun was noon high and Matsuo perspired until his body was dripping . Wet also were the marine's fatigues and the face had an oily film . The man had thrown the left hand over his eyes . Now and again he murmured something that ended in a giggle . He must have saturated himself in the drink , for the bullet not to shock him out of his drunken haze . Matsuo shook his head . Strange . At last he reached for the knife . Even the bone handle scorched , and he retrieved the marine's handkerchief to wrap it . First he barely touched the blade on the hand which shaded the eyes . The marine yelled and flung the hand away . With a firm grip on the man's hair Matsuo applied the blade flat on a cheek . A shrill yelp , kicked legs , and groping hands that circled Matsuo's wrist . Matsuo wrenched free and burned the hands into retreat ; ; burned the other cheek ; ; burned each hand when they came groping again . The marine commenced to weep and it blighted the sense of enjoyment . Matsuo stood up . `` A small measure of payment , marine '' . He dropped the knife in its scabbard , hung the rifle behind a shoulder . The marine , hands on cheeks , rolled by his unwounded side onto his stomach . He ceased weeping . Matsuo walked toward his tree , once glancing back . The marine was still . He would soon die . As Matsuo climbed by using the vines and kicking his feet against the trunk , a mood of gloom immersed him like a jungle shadow . What now ? ? In the jungle , birds were mute , while insects preserved only the monotony of living . Someone called . It was the marine : head lifted , he strained and called . Then he astonished Matsuo by pushing and dragging himself until he sat . He cupped his mouth and yelled . Matsuo hustled the rifle off his shoulder . Once and for all he'd finish this marine who would not die . He aimed , but listened . It sounded as if the man were calling him : `` Hey , Japanese hey there , Japanese '' . The man tilted back his head and went through the pantomime of drinking from a container . He performed the act twice more , and the begging in his tone grew more distinct . `` Sake '' ? ? Matsuo called . The marine nodded vigorously . Matsuo laughed , slung the rifle . The marine was a winehead . His superiors had said that all marines were depraved . The marine slumped forward into a bow like a priest before an idol . Remembering his own thirst , Matsuo took out his water bottle . One swallow was all he would have ; ; he was very thirsty , but he must observe water discipline . His years of campaigning had taught him the value of water discipline . He began to uncap the bottle , the rusty cap squealing on its threads . Popping upright , the marine waved both hands and shouted . Of course it was water he really craved ; ; down in the broil of the sun he was becoming dried out . The marine shouted for it until it seemed that his voice had to crack . Matsuo shook his head . He had no water for an enemy . And when this was gone , he hadn't even a little bitter tablet to purify other water if he were to discover some stagnant jungle pool . He capped the bottle and replaced it . After all , he had less reason to desire it than the marine . Before much longer the marine quieted down . His head slumped . The upper part of his packet had stained dark . `` Marine . There is nothing for you '' , Matsuo said . `` Your superiors will certainly beat you for your desertion , besides the dishonor of it . I've nothing for you '' . From the convulsive quivers of the man's shoulders it was plain he had resumed the weeping . He reminded Matsuo of a similar thing he had witnessed in China . In China it was a baby sitting on a railroad platform , smudged , blood-specked , with the village burning about him and shells exploding . Chairs scraped back and customers hastily vacated their tables as the tall young buffalo hunter pushed open the swing doors and walked towards the bar . Only Blue Throat and his gang stayed where they were . Blue Throat was slumped with his back against the bar , elbows supporting his massive frame . He leered at the stranger as the distance between them closed . `` Since when did they allow beardless kids into the saloon bars of this town , boys '' ? ? He asked . `` Seems to me I don't remember altering any law about that '' . He straightened up , alert now as the buffalo hunter came closer . `` Stay right here where you are , kid '' , he called . `` I don't aim to have minors breathing down my neck when I'm a-drinking '' : The stranger ignored him . He didn't stop till he was within three feet of Blue Throat and by that time the gang leader's right hand was on the butt of his revolver . `` I'm Billy Tilghman '' , said the stranger , `` and I've come for Pat Conyers' body '' . `` And what makes you think you're going to get it , pretty boy '' ? ? `` Because I'm asking . Most of the time I get what I ask for '' . Blue Throat winked at his six cronies . `` The kid has no manners , boys . Shall we teach him some '' ? ? His gun was half drawn when he asked the question , but the weapon never left its holster . Tilghman's clenched fist swept over in a terrific right cross and clipped the big gunfighter on the side of his chin . His head snapped round and he reeled back , crashing into the table where his buddies were sprawling . Tilghman leapt on to him , dragged him upright and hit him again , this time sending him careening against the bar . A bullet gouged into the bar top an inch from Tilghman's stomach as Blue Throat's henchmen started shooting . Tilghman flung himself aside , dropped on one knee and pulled his own gun . The Colt roared twice and two men dropped , writhing . A third shot doused the light . Somewhere at the far end of the room a voice yelled , `` You all right , Billy '' ? ? `` Yes , George , but I ain't got poor old Pat's body yet . And I aim to have it '' . He fired again , and somewhere in the gloom a man screamed . Another took off his gun belt and flung his weapons to the floor . `` OK , Tilghman , I'm quitting '' . `` And me '' , said another Blue Throat henchman . Somebody brought a light . Tilghman and his partner , George Rust , herded the men into a corner . `` And now '' , said Tilghman with deadly calm , `` I'll repeat what I said . I've come for Pat Conyers' body '' . In two minutes the body of Tilghman's former comrade , who had been killed by Blue Throat in a gambling brawl the previous night , was carried into the town's funeral parlor to be prepared for decent burial . Blue Throat , nursing an aching jaw and a collosal dose of wounded pride , rode out of town with the survivors of the fight . `` That critter will be back tomorrow '' , predicted George Rust , `` and he'll bring fifty of his kind back with him . Blue Throat won't stand for this . He'll shoot up the town '' . The prediction was correct . The Reverend James Doran had scarcely completed Pat Conyers' last rites on Boot Hill in the township of Petrie , when shots were heard in the distance . `` Amen '' , said the Reverend Doran , grabbing his rifle propped up against a tombstone , `` and now my brethren , it would seem that our presence is required elsewhere '' . Billy Tilghman and his comrades rode off to the battle . Blue Throat , who had ruled the town with his six-shooter for the last six months , certainly had no intention of relinquishing his profitable dictatorship . It was essential that he should restore his formidable reputation as a rip-roaring , ruthless gun-slinger , and this was the time-honored Wild West method of doing it . He rode in at the head of sixty trigger-happy and liquor-crazed desperadoes and took over a livery barn at the entrance to Main Street . The entire length of the street could be raked with rifle fire from this barn . Any posse riding down the street to demand Blue Throat's surrender would be wiped out with one deadly burst of fire . The law-abiding citizens of Petrie had gathered inside Kaster's Store , halfway down the street . Several were firing into the barn when Billy Tilghman arrived . He sized up the situation and shook his head . `` If Blue Throat has his way he'll keep us all cooped up in here for days '' , he said . `` There's only one thing to move him fast , and we have it right here in this very store '' . He called the store owner and together they went into the stockroom . Billy returned with six sticks of dynamite . `` I'm gonna drop these into Blue Throat's lap '' , he announced , `` and I'd like every gun to be firing into that barn while I get near enough to toss 'em through the window '' . He slipped outside , hugging the walls of buildings and dodging into doorways . Blue Throat's men spotted him and a hail of bullets splintered the store fronts and board walk as he passed . Fifty yards away from the barn he dodged inside a barber's shop and came out at the back . Here he couldn't be seen by Blue Throat and his gang . All he had to do was light the fuses of the dynamite sticks , run to within ten yards of an open window in the barn and hurl the sticks through . Billy Tilghman did just that . Within seconds the big barn was blasted into smoking splinters , with every outlaw either dead or injured inside . It was the abrupt end of Blue Throat's dictatorship in Petrie . Though only slightly injured himself the big hoodlum never returned to those parts . To Tilghman the incident was just one of a long list of hair-raising , smash-'em-down adventures on the side of the law which started in 1872 when he was only eighteen years old , and did not end till fifty years later when he was shot dead after warning a drunk to be quiet . Of all the rip-roaring two-fisted tough boys of the Old West , `` Uncle Billy Tilghman '' stands out head and shoulders . He was the lawman who survived more gunfights than any other famous gun-slinging character in the book . He saw the most action , beat up more badmen with his bare fists , broke up the most gangs and sent more murderers to the gallows than any other U.S. marshal who lived before or after him . For fifty years his guns and ham-like fists shot holes through and battered the daylights out of the enemies of law and order in the frontier towns of the West . The deeds of countless western bandits and outlaws have been glorified almost to the point of hero-worship , but because Billy Tilghman remained strictly on the side of the law throughout his action-packed career , his achievements and the appalling risks he took while taming the West have remained almost unsung . Citizens took the view that a lawman was expected to risk his life on the odd occasion anyway , but this fighting fury of a man risked it regularly over a period of half a century . He came within an ace of being riddled with bullets during his long fight with the Doolin gang which terrorized Oklahoma in the 1890's . Led by Bill Doolin , these mobsters specialized in train robberies but as a sideline they looted stores and robbed banks , making liberal use of their guns . Bill Doolin's ambition , it appeared , was to carve out his name with bullets alongside those of Jesse James and Billy the Kid , and Bill Tilghman had sworn he would stop him . Tilghman knew that some ranchers were hand-in-glove with the Doolin gang . They bought rustled cattle from the outlaw , kept him supplied with guns and ammunition , harbored his men in their houses . Billy decided to set an example by arresting one of the ranchers , named Ed Dunn , who lived at Rock Fort . On a bitterly cold day in January , 1895 , accompanied only by Neal Brown as his deputy , Tilghman left the township of Guthrie and headed for Rock Fort and Dunn's ranch . It was snowing hard when they got there and they saw no horses outside . The only evidence of occupation came from the chimney , which was belching out thick smoke . The two lawmen halted their wagon about twenty yards from the door . `` Wait here , Neal '' , said Tilghman . `` If I don't come out within half an hour ride back to town and bring out a posse '' . Leaving his rifle in the wagon , Tilghman walked up to the door and hammered on it . There was no reply so he shoved it open with his foot and stepped inside . Directly opposite the door was a roaring log fire , a welcome sight on that bitterly cold day . Seated near it with his back to the door was the rancher , Ed Dunn . `` Hello , Ed '' , said Tilghman . The rancher grunted an acknowledgement but didn't move . Tilghman closed the door behind him and walked towards the fire . Suddenly he saw something which made his big heart give a sickening lurch and caused the hairs to bristle on the back of his neck . Along each side of the room were six tiered bunks , each one screened off with a curtain . And projecting wickedly through these curtains were the gleaming muzzles of six rifles , all trained on Billy Tilghman . The fighting marshal had walked right into a trap and at any moment six slugs might slam into his hide . Thinking fast , Tilghman never hesitated for one instant . He walked right up to the fire as though blissfully unaware of the guns covering him . The men behind them were Bill Doolin and five of his gang -- every man a killer . `` Cold day '' , said Tilghman , placing his hands behind him and casually presenting his backside to the fire . `` Just dropped in to ask where Jed Hawkins lives . Can't seem to locate landmarks in this snow '' . The rancher was trembling . He wouldn't look Tilghman in the face . `` Follow the river for five miles '' , he said hoarsely . `` Jed's homestead is on the south bank '' . Resisting the overwhelming temptation to flng himself out of that bristling death-trap , Tilghman deliberately engaged the nervous rancher in trivial conversation for a good ten minutes . All that time rifle barrels were pointing unwaveringly at his head and body . One false move on his part and he would be a dead man . `` Well '' , he announced , `` Guess I'll be going now , Ed , and thanks for the warmup '' . He strolled back to the door , whistling softly , hands still clasped behind him . He left the house and almost certain death without even increasing his pace and wondered by what remarkable stroke of Providence he had been allowed to come out alive . But he knew well enough that those guns would still be trained on his back as he walked towards the wagon . If he showed signs of collecting his rifle and going back with his deputy to the ranch he would be shot down instantly . Leisurely he climbed on to the wagon next to Neal Brown . `` Don't say or do anything '' , he said softly . `` Just get out of here without it looking as though we're in a hurry . That place is crawling with Bill Doolin and his gang '' . Even as he spoke those words Billy Tilghman's life hung on a thread . Back in the house a hoodlum named Red Buck , sore because Billy had been allowed to leave unscathed , jumped from a bunk and swore he was going after him to kill him right then . `` You'll stay right here '' , commanded Bill Doolin , covering Red with his rifle . `` Billy Tilghman is too good a man to shoot in the back . We'll let him go '' . But the fighting marshal's fifty-year run of immunity from violent death came to a full and final stop one night in a street at Cromwell , Oklahoma , where he had been sent to clean up the gambling and vice rackets . Wiley Lynn , a self-styled prohibition officer , had hit town the previous day and had been drinking ever since . That night he reeled out of Ma Murphy's dance hall and proceeded to disturb the peace by shooting off his revolver . For several months now , Jack Carter , a big overgrown boy of fifteen with a fuzzy , pimpled face and greenish catlike eyes with a lot of red in them , had been haunted by a dream , a vision , of a Woman . This Woman had no distinct shape or size and no particular face , but she radiated warmth , a sweet warmth ; ; she would talk to him in a soothing voice about things his mother would have said were not nice and put her hands on him and kiss him passionately . When she would do these things , he would turn blind for an instant and become sick at his stomach . Then he would run to the toilet behind the house . Sometimes he did this three or four times a day , for this Woman was almost always with him . He would feel ashamed each time and wonder whether his mother and father knew -- thinking they might see it in his eyes or smell it on him . But they never said anything , so he figured it was all right . And so when Miss Langford came to teach at the one-room Chestnut school , where Jack was a pupil in the eighth grade , the Woman of Jack's mind assumed the teacher's face and figure . He could not keep his eyes off her when at school ; ; when he went home at night , he took her with him in his mind , and she did the things the anonymous Woman used to do , and he did the thing afterwards each time as he used to do . When he awoke in the mornings , she was in his mind and he could hardly wait to get to school to be near her in the flesh . Miss Langford ( her first name was Evelyn ) was an attractive girl . Tall , blonde , blue-eyes , fair , buxom without being heavy , she cut a fine figure of budding womanhood as she swished among the pupils in her fresh , starched summer dress . Something was beginning to stir and come alive in her , too ( it may have been there for a good while , since she was twenty now ; ; but if it had been , it had been smothered until now by fear ) : you could tell it by the way she watched the older , bigger boys , like Jack . She would look at Jack , with that hidden something in her eyes , and Jack would see the Woman and become breathless and a little sick . School began in August , the hottest part of the year , and for the first few days Miss Langford was very lenient with the children , letting them play a lot and the new ones sort of get acquainted with one another . The first two or three days they went home early . All , that is , except Jack . He hung around the schoolhouse , watching through a window from outside while Miss Langford straightened desks and put the room in order . Once ( this was on the third day of school ) she kneeled down to pick up some books where they'd dropped on the floor and Jack looked up her dress -- at the bare expanse of incredibly white leg . He thought for a moment his heart had stopped beating . About that time Miss Langford straightened up and looked out the window directly at him , he thought , although probably she didn't even see him . He jumped back , ducked and ran , crouching , down the hill away from the school . He didn't look back and he ran until he was out of sight of the schoolhouse and out of breath ; ; then he slowed to a walk . The vision became even stronger now . `` I'll get her yet '' , he muttered to himself . `` I've got to get her '' . That night he dreamed a dream violent with passion , in which he and the Woman , now the teacher , did everything except engage in the act ( and this probably only because he had never engaged in the act in reality ) , and when he awoke the next morning his heart was afire . He ate litle that morning , and his mother became concerned , inasmuch as he usually ate heartily . `` What's the matter , honey '' ? ? She said , with the solicitude of a middle-aged woman for her only child . `` Aren't you hungry '' ? ? `` No , I'm not hungry '' , he said , pushing back the bacon and eggs . Outside it was already hot at 7:30 A.M. , and it was getting hot in the kitchen . He felt a little sick at his stomach . `` Are you sick '' ? ? `` No '' , he said . `` I'll be all right . I guess it's this hot weather '' . `` Don't you play hard today then . And if you get sick , ask the teacher to let you come home early . Daddy left the car for me , and I'm going to town this afternoon '' . `` OK. , I won't play hard '' , he promised . Just then Charles Lever yelled , `` Hey , Jack '' , from the quarry road which ran behind the Carter house , and Jack grabbed the lunch from the table and darted out the kitchen door , yelling `` Good-bye , Mom '' over his shoulder . `` Whaddya say , boy '' ? ? Charles said , grinning , showing his huge yellow teeth . Charles , also fifteen , was tall and skinny , scraggly , with straight black hair like an Indian's and sharp brown eyes . He considered himself handsome and seemed to think all the girls were after him . `` You know what I done last night '' ? ? Charles said as they picked their way over the rocky road which led up the hill away from the Dixie Highway , through a corn field and a patch of woods to the school . Jack knew of course that the tale to be unfolded would involve a girl and probably be dirty , because girls were Charles' only apparent interest . But Jack always derived vicarious sensual thrills from Charles' revelations ( even when he suspected his friend of exaggeration or invention ) , so he usually invited them , as he did now . `` No . What '' ? ? `` I got Margaret Rider in one of them old box cars down there by the quarry '' . A nude imaginary picture of Miss Langford flashed across Jack's mind . His heart beat faster . `` Hell you say '' ? ? He said , lapsing into the profanity he often used when away from his parents and especially when he was with Charles . `` How'd you do it '' ? ? `` Hell , I jist got on top of -- '' `` No , I mean how'd you get her to do it '' ? ? `` Hell , I jist ask her '' . `` Jist like that '' ? ? `` Hell , yes . She's been hangin' around me a lot here lately , and I figgered I might as well's try it . Besides I heard her old uncle that stays there has been doin' it '' . `` I never heard that '' . `` It's all over Branchville . If you'd get out of your back yard once in a while you might even get her your ownself '' . `` I might try it one of these days '' , Jack said wonderingly , thinking of Miss Langford . When they reached the school , a gang of boys and girls were already there playing `` crack the whip '' in front of the schoolhouse . Miss Langford , in a fresh white dress and low-heeled white sandals , without socks , was out there with them , trying to get them inside . `` Time for books '' , she yelled , jingling a little five-and-dime store bell in her right hand . `` Let's go inside '' . `` Oh , come on Miss Langford , play with us just onct '' , one of the little girls begged , smiling wistfully . `` No , not now '' , said the teacher . `` Maybe at dinner time . Come inside now '' . The children grudgingly stopped playing then and straggled into the schoolhouse . Jack watched Miss Langford all morning . He could think of nothing else save his mental image of her nude figure and what Charles had said that morning about Margaret Rider . Occasionally he would look across the aisle at Margaret , fourteen and demure in a fresh green organdy dress , sitting in the sixth-grade row , and he could hardly believe she would do what Charles had said she did . At noontime , remembering what the teacher had said about maybe playing with the kids , Jack stayed close to the schoolhouse while all the other big boys , except Charles , went off out the road to play ball . `` Why ain't you playin' ball '' ? ? He asked Charles suspiciously as they sat in the well-house shade , watching the girls congregate in front of the schoolhouse . `` Miss Langford , come out and play with us like you promised '' , several of the little girls called . `` I'd druther stay here and watch the girls '' , Charles grinned . `` Maybe some of 'em will fall down and we'll see up their dress '' . `` Maybe '' , Jack said idly , watching for Miss Langford . Presently she came out of the schoolhouse . When she appeared , two or three of the little girls jumped up and down , yelling , `` Goody , goody '' . `` Let's play with 'em '' , Jack said , rising from where he sat on the ground and dusting off his overall pants . `` O.K. '' Charles rose also , and the two of them moved over to join the girls . They played crack the whip a few minutes without mishap . Then when Miss Langford was on the end of the line of girls , Jack , in the middle of the line , gave an extra hard pull and the young teacher sprawled backwards , sitting down hard , her dress flying over her head . While she was struggling to get her skirt down and get on her feet again , Jack ran over , offered her his hand and said , `` Gosh , I'm sorry , Miss Langford . I didn't mean to pull so hard '' . `` That's all right '' , she said , tossing her head back to get the hair out of her eyes . `` It was my fault '' . With one hand she held her skirt down while she took Jack's extended hand with the other . When her hand touched his , fire went through Jack and he felt weak , but he managed somehow to get her on her feet . He thought she gave him that look with the hidden something in it as he let her hand go . `` Thank you '' , she said , dusting herself off . `` Will you play with us again , Miss Langford '' ? ? One of the little girls said . `` No more today . Maybe some other day '' . `` Oh , shucks '' , the girl said . `` I don't believe I'll play any more neither '' . `` Me neither '' , others said , and soon the game broke up , the children going off in pairs , in larger groups and alone . Jack walked off alone out the road in the searing midday sun , past Robert Allen's three-room , tarpapered house , toward the field where the other boys were playing ball , thinking of what he would do in order to make Miss Langford have him stay in after school -- because this was the day he had decided when he thought he saw the look in her eyes . When he came back to the schoolhouse , his mind was made up . He simply would not work his arithmetic problems when the teacher held his class . That should do it , he thought , because Miss Langford had said she was going to be strict about school work . He had considered throwing erasers or flipping paperwads at someone or pulling the hair of the girl sitting in front of him , but he couldn't take a chance on either of these possibilities : the teacher probably would make him stand face-to-wall in a corner instead of stay in after school . The only drawback now to the plan he'd decided on was that someone else might fail to do his work , too , and the teacher would have that person stay late along with Jack . `` But I've got to take a chance on it '' , he told himself desperately . To his surprise his plan worked perfectly . `` All right , if you can't do your arithmetic during school hours you can do it after school is out '' , Miss Langford said firmly , not smiling . `` You will stay here thirty minutes after the others go home this afternoon and work your problems '' . And so when the others stampeded out that afternoon Jack remained docilely in his seat near a window , looking out in what he hoped was a pitiable manner , while the other kids laughed and yelled in at him and made faces as they dispersed , going home . He scarcely saw them . His heart was pounding like a mighty dynamo and he was trying to think , his mind seeming to scream at him like a hurt or frightened child , `` How will I do it ? ? On the fringe of the amused throng of white onlookers stood a young woman of remarkable beauty and poise . She munched little ginger cakes called mulatto's belly and kept her green , somewhat hypnotic eyes fixed on a light-colored male who was prancing wildly with a 5-foot king snake wrapped around his bronze neck . The youth with the snake had a natural pride and joy of life which appealed to the woman . Lithe and muscular , he had well-molded features , and his light color told of the European ancestors who had been intimate with the slave women of his family . The haughty white girl turned to a distinguished , hawk-faced man standing at her side and murmured : `` Look at your watch , Col. Garvier . It is almost time for and calinda to begin '' . Col. Henri Garvier was one of New Orleans' most important and enlightened slave owners . He chuckled and gave the signal for the dance to start . The slaves ran gaily to the center of Congo Square and gathered around a sweaty youth they called Johnny No-Name . Johnny vigorously pounded two bleached steer bones against the gourd which served as his drum . He showed his gleaming tusks of teeth and bellowed incoherently , his brass earrings jangling discordantly as he shook and trembled in ecstasy . The drummer flogged the gourd with frantic intensity as the dancers began the calinda , a sensual gyration which had long been a favorite of voodoo practitioners and their disciples in the Louisiana slave compounds . The dance was of Haitian origin . The white girl with the penetrating green eyes sipped the lemonade handed to her by a handsome man of about 30 , who had coppery skin and beetling eyebrows . He was possessive in his manner and , though a slave , obviously was educated after a fashion and imitated the manners of his owners . He proudly wore the blue livery of her house , for the girl was Madame Delphine Lalaurie , wife of the prominent surgeon , Dr. Louis Lalaurie , who bore one of the South's oldest and most cherished names . Delphine was a pace-setter in high society . She was a top horsewoman and one of the city's most gracious hostesses . Although New Orleans was not to learn of it for a spell , she also was a sadist , a nymphomaniac and unobtrusively mad -- the perpetrator of some of the worst crimes against humanity ever committed on American soil . Madame Lalaurie gestured with her riding crop toward the 20-year-old youth who was stomping and writhing with the king snake still draped over his bare shoulders . The slender , handsome fellow was called Dandy Brandon by the other slaves . He was gifted with animal magnetism and a potent allure for women of any race . But Dandy had had little experience with girls on his master's plantation in Bayou St. John . Shy , actually , he avoided feminine overtures and seemed truly ignorant of the girls' desires when they sought to make liaisons with him in the open fields , in carriages and in boathouses . This young slave was therefore quite unprepared when Delphine Lalaurie signaled that she wanted him to draw near . The woman eyed the youth with the avidity a coin collector might display toward a rare doubloon which is not yet in his collection . `` What is your name , boy ? ? Come a bit closer . I won't bite , you know '' . He gaped at Madame Lalaurie and sniffed the Paris perfume which emanated from her . Then he smiled shyly . `` My name is Dandy Brandon , missy . I belong to Master Alexander Prieur '' . She said with intense feeling : `` Come near , let me feel your arms . You look quite strong and healthy to me , Dandy '' . Mrs. Lalaurie impatiently propelled the slave toward her waiting carriage . Lifting her skirts , she climbed in , never relinquishing her grip on his arm . The woman seemed utterly unafraid of the snake which coiled on the floor in a torpor . Once inside the luxuriosly-upholstered landau , she drew the curtains and proceeded to give the startled youth the kind of physical examination usually reserved for army inductees . Satisfied at last , and after a few amorous gambits on her part which convinced Delphine that Dandy was capable of learning new arts , she opened the window and called to her liveried driver . This was the big man with the proprietory air and the beetling , shaggy eyebrows . `` Aristide ! ! I want you to find Monsieur Prieur at once and give him this money for the boy's purchase . There's $600 in gold in this chamois sack . If the old fool argues about the price , tell him I shall order my husband not to treat him as a patient any longer . Prieur has gout and depends on Louis' pills and bleedings . Besides , he owns 300 slaves . One less shouldn't matter to him '' . Aristide Devol , the sardonic manservant who had been brought in chains years before from his native Sierra Leone , smiled thinly and touched his well-brushed beaver hat . His bold eyes raked the woman , and a perceptive spectator might sense that there was more to their relationship than that of slave to owner . `` Another youth , Madame '' ? ? The coachman said softly . `` This one is a tender chicken , oui ? ? Such delicate beauty , such fine flesh . It will rip and shred easily for Madame '' . `` Be quiet , Devol ! ! You are forgetting your place '' . The tall coachman walked off briskly in search of Alexander Prieur . Delphine Lalaurie took the reins in her gloved hands and drove Dandy Brandon -- cowering in the back seat of the carriage -- to her mansion at 677 Perdido Street . Dr. Louis Lalaurie stood on the veranda at the head of the driveway and watched his carriage as it approached the pillared mansion . Dandy , curiosity overcoming his apprehensions , peered out at the doctor from the window of the vehicle . He saw a pint-sized man with a graying spade beard and an unusually large head . Dr. Lalaurie wore a maroon smoking jacket , and his myopic eyes were blurry and glistened behind thick octagonal lenses . He was about 50 years old . `` Another young man , my dear ? ? Really , you are most indiscreet to drive him here yourself '' , he said , frowning with displeasure . Delphine presented her cheek for a kiss , and the physician pecked it like a timid rooster . `` Dandy is to be our house guest , Louis . I want the room in the attic prepared for him He is a most unusual lad , quite precocious in many ways . He deserves a better life than just rotting away on the Prieur plantation '' . `` Quite so , my dear . His room will be ready shortly '' . The physician led the horses to the stable after a cursory glance at the cringing slave . Had Dandy been older or wiser , instinct might have warned him that he would be well advised to flee from the Lalauries' tender care if he valued his life . But he liked the smell of Delphine's perfume . Besides , her endearments and caresses in the carriage had been new and stirring experiences to the simple youth . Also , he was weary of plantation drudgery and monotony . So Dandy Brandon trustingly entered the house with Delphine Lalaurie and trudged up the rear steps to the attic room which was to be his new home . Airless and dingy though it was , the attic represented luxury to a slave who had led a wretched life with six brothers and sisters and assorted relatives in a shanty at Bayou St. John . He bounced exuberantly on the sagging bed and was even more delighted when Madame Lalaurie -- after closing the door -- showed the slave that the bed was designed for something other than slumber . It was just as well that the ignorant Dandy enjoyed himself to the hilt that first evening , for the room was to become his prison cell . When he finally left the sinister mansion on Perdido Street , he was carried out in a coroner's basket . Just six weeks after Dandy Brandon's arrival at the mansion , the little surgeon and his svelte young wife gave their annual open house and ball , to which only New Orleans' oldest and wealthiest families were invited . A stringed orchestra played softly behind the potted palms , and Delphine circulated graciously among her guests , chatting airily of the forthcoming races , the latest fashions from Paris , and Louisiana politics . Suddenly there was a commotion upstairs , a despairing boyish shriek , and the strains of the waltz faltered and died as the musicians and guests gaped at an apparition descending the marble staircase . It was Dandy Brandon , clad only in a bloody loincloth , emaciated and quaking as if the devil were breathing hard on him . The lad's once superb body was a mass of scars and welts . His pinched face showed the ravages of malnutrition . Feebly he pointed an accusing finger at Madame Lalaurie and shouted : `` Evil woman ! ! You did this you like to hurt to beat people I want to go home '' . These were the last words he ever uttered . Convulsively , he spat up some blood and collapsed into the arms of Senator Gaston Berche , crimsoning the frilly shirt and waistcoat the politician wore . Dr. Louis Lalaurie examined the inert form of the slave on the parquet dance floor and pronounced him dead . The ball broke up in confusion . Guests stared with horror at Madame Lalaurie and made speedy departures . Delphine stood like stone , her eyes alive with hate as she looked down at the sheeted corpse . But at the coroner's inquest Delphine told a forthright story . `` I saw the boy Dandy at the Congo Square festivities and felt sorry for him . It was our hope to educate him and to give him his freedom when the right time came , for he was a bright and friendly youth who seemed worthy of our interest . After I paid Monsieur Prieur for Dandy , I brought him home , but he was ill at ease and ran away the same night . How he returned in such a ghastly condition , or why , I cannot say . Dr. Lalaurie and I didn't even know he was in the house until the night of our ball when he came down the stairs '' . She daubed at her swimming eyes with a lacy handkerchief and said with obvious emotion : `` That poor boy ! ! He must have fallen in with evil companions , for he was a simple youth and quite trusting and inexperienced . Ruffians must have robbed and beaten him before bringing him back to our house to die . Such a pitiful end '' ! ! Though the slave's dying words about the woman troubled the coroner's panel , Dandy's accusation was adjudged an aberration by the jury and disregarded . The Lalauries were at the top rung of the social ladder , and even a jury didn't feel privileged to doubt the veracity of so illustrious a lady . Moreover , runaway slaves frequently got into serious trouble in New Orleans' dives . So the verdict was `` death at the hands of a person or persons unknown '' , and the elite of the city , accepting Delphine's testimony , welcomed her and the doctor back into the fold . Once again life went its serene way -- soirees , fox hunts , balls and dinners . The excitement over Brandon's bizarre death abated and Madame Lalaurie's stock soared when she resumed her self-imposed chores of visiting the poor and bringing cakes and comfort to destitute patients in the county hospital . Then , on July 2 , there occurred another incident which set tongues to wagging at a furious clip . Mrs. Victor Dominique , socially prominent and a neighbor of the Lalauries , chanced to glance out of her parlor window at dusk one evening and beheld an amazing sight . The manservant Devol and his mistress , Delphine Lalaurie , were pursuing a young girl -- an octoroon of cameo-like beauty -- across the front lawn of the Lalaurie mansion . The girl was not more than 16 . She was nude to the waist and her tumbled abundance of black hair did not conceal the knife slashes on her back . The bleeding girl was tiring fast ; ; the coachman and Delphine were gaining on her as she raced down Perdido Street . The fugitive cried out in an oddly sibilant voice : `` Help me , somebody ! ! They have pulled out all my teeth and now she will carve out my tongue with her hacksaw ! ! `` Bastards '' , he would say , `` all I did was put a beat to that Vivaldi stuff , and the first chair clobbered me '' ! ! Since then , and since the pure grain had gotten him divorced from every decent -- and even indecent -- group from Greenwich Village to the Embarcadero , he had become a sucker-rolling freight-jumper . `` There ain't nothin' faster , or lonelier , or more direct than a cannonball freight when you wanna go someplace '' , Feathertop would say . `` The accommodations may not be the poshest , but man ! ! There ain't nobody askin' for your ticket stub , neither '' . He had been conning the freights for a long , long time now . Ever since the hooch , and the trouble with the Quartet , and Midge and the child . Ever since all that . It had been a very long time that had no form and no end . He was -- as he told himself in the vernacular of a trade no longer his own -- riding the dark train out . Out and out and never to return again . Till one day the last freight had been jumped , the last pint had been killed , the last beat had been rapped . That was the day it ended . The freight car was cold , early in the morning . He was pressed far back into the corner of the car on his hay sacks , the rattling and tinning of the wheels on the rails almost covering the sound of his ocarina . He held his elbows away from his body , and the little sweet potato trilled neatly and sweetly as he tickled its tune-belly . The train slowed at a road crossing , and the big door slid open ; ; at first gratingly , caught by grains of corn -- then with a clash into its slot . The boy lifted the girl by the waist and set her on the lip of the floor . She pulled her legs up under her , to rise , her full peasant skirt drawing up her thighs , and Feathertop's music pfffted away . `` Now that is a very nice , a very nice '' , he murmured to himself , back in his corner . A little thing , but the right twist for the action that counted . Hot , that was the word , hot ! ! Hair like a morning-frightened sparrow's wings , with the sun shining down over them . A poet , yet ! ! His thoughts for the swanlike neck , the full , high breasts , the slim waist , and the long legs were less than poetic , however . Zingggg-O ! ! Then the boy straight-armed himself up , twisting at the last moment so he landed sitting . He was less to see , but Feathertop took him in , too , just to keep the records straight . Curly hair , high cheekbones , wide gnomelike mouth , a pair of drummer's blocky hands , and a body that said well , maybe I can wrestle you for ten minutes -- but then I'm finished . `` We made it , Cappy '' , the chick said . `` Yeah , seems so , don't it '' , the boy laughed , hugging her close . `` Ah-ah '' ! ! Feathertop interrupted , standing up , brushing the pig offal from his dirty pants . `` None of that . We run a respectable house here '' . They whirled and saw him , standing there dim in the slatted light from the boarded freight wall . He was big , and filthy , and his toes stuck out of the flapping tops of his shoes . He held the black plastic kazoo lightly . `` Come sit '' , said Feathertop , motioning them toward him . `` That crap is softer over here '' . The girl smiled , and started forward . The boy yanked her back hard , tugging her off her feet , and gathered her into the crook of his arm . `` Now stay with me , Kitty '' , he snapped irritably . `` I vowed to take care of you -- and that's what I'm gonna do . We don't know this guy '' . `` Oooo , square bit '' , Feathertop screwed his face up . This guy was strictly from Outsville . But nowhere ! ! `` What is with this vow jazz '' ? ? Feathertop inquired , lounging against the freight's vibrating wall . `` We -- we eloped '' , Cappy said . His head came up and he said it defiantly . `` Well , congratulations '' . Feathertop made an elaborate motion with his hand . These two were going to be easy pickins . They couldn't have much dough , but then none of the freight-bums Feathertop rolled had much . And besides , the chick had a little something the others didn't have . That was gonna be fun collecting ! ! But not just yet . Feathertop was a connoisseur . He liked to savor his meat before he tasted it . `` Come sit '' , he repeated , motioning to the piled hay bags , over the pig leavings . `` I'm just a poor ex-jazz man , name of -- uh -- Boyd Smith '' . He grinned at them wolfishly . `` That ain't your name , Mister '' , the boy accused . `` And you know -- you're right '' ! ! Feathertop aimed a finger at him . `` Oh , come on , Cappy '' , the girl chided . `` He's okay . He's a nice guy '' . She started to move toward the hay bags , dragging the reluctant Cappy behind her . Feathertop watched the smooth scissoring of her slim , trim legs as she walked to the bags , and tucked them beneath her , smoothing the skirt out in a wide circle . He cleared his throat ; ; it had been a long , hot while since he'd seen anything as nice as this within grabbin' distance . He had it all doped , of course . Slug the kid , grab his dough -- at least enough to get to Philadelphia -- and then have a rockin' ball with the doll . Hmm -- diddle ! ! `` Where'd you come from , Mr. -- uh -- Mr. Smith '' ? ? Kitty inquired politely . `` Where from '' ? ? He mused . `` Out . I been riding train for a ways now '' . They lapsed into silence , and the freight wallowed up a hill , scooted down the other side , shaking and clanking to itself . After a while , Kitty murmured something to Cappy , and he held her close , answering , `` We'll just have to wait till we pull into Philly , honey '' . `` What's the matter , she wanna go the bathroom '' ? ? Ernie found it immensely funny . The boy scowled at him , and the girl looked shocked . `` No ! ! Certainly not , I mean , no that isn't what I said '' ! ! She snapped at him . `` I only said I was hungry . We haven't had anything to eat all day '' . Joviality suffused Feathertop Ernie Cargill's voice as he reached behind him , pulling out a battered carpet bag , with leather handles . `` Whyn't ya say so , fellow travelers ! ! Why , we got dinner right here . C'mon , buddy , help me set up the kitchen and we'll have food in a minute or two '' . Cappy looked wary , but he moved off the floorboards and followed the dirty ex-musician to the center of the refuse-littered boxcar . Ernie crouched and opened the carpet bag . He took out a small packet filled with bits of charcoal , a deep pot of thin metal , some sheets of newspaper , a book of matches and a wrinkled and many-times folded piece of tin foil with holes in it . He put the charcoal in the pot , lit the paper with the matches , and carefully stretched the tin foil across the top of the pot . `` A charcoal pit , man '' , he said , indicating the slightly-smoking makeshift brazier . `` Fan it '' , he told Cappy , handing him a sheet of newspaper . `` Yeah , but what're we gonna eat ? ? Charcoal '' ? ? `` Fella '' , Ernie waggled a dirty finger at the younger man , `` you try my ever-lovin' patience '' . He reached once more into the carpet bag and brought up a package of wieners . `` Hot dogs , man . Not the greatest , but they stick to your belly insides '' . He ripped down the cellophane carefully , and laid three dogs on the tin foil . Almost immediately they began to sizzle . He looked up and grinned . `` A Kroger's self-serve '' , he explained . `` I self-served '' . When they had licked the last of the wieners' taste from their fingers , they settled back , and Cappy offered Ernie a cigarette . Nice kid , Ernie thought , too bad . `` How come you're riding the rods , kids like you '' ? ? Ernie asked . Cappy looked down at his wide hands , and did not reply . But surprisingly , Kitty's face came up and she said , `` My father . He didn't want us to get married . So we ran away '' . `` Why didn't he want you to get hitched '' ? ? This time even she did not answer . She looked down at her hands , too . After a few seconds , she said , `` Dad didn't like Cappy . It was my fault '' . Cappy's head came around sharply . `` Your fault , hell ! ! It was all my fault . If I'd been careful it never woulda '' -- he stopped abruptly . Ernie's eyebrows went up . `` What's the matter '' ? ? The girl still did not raise her eyes , but she added simply , `` I'm pregnant '' . Cappy raged at himself . `` Oh he was stupid , her old man ! ! You never heard nothin' like it : Kitty's gonna go have an abortion , and Kitty's gonna go away to a convent , and Kitty's this and Kitty's that like he was nuts or somethin' , y'know '' ? ? Ernie nodded . This was a slightly different matter . He remembered Midge , and the child . But that had been a time before all this , a time he didn't think about . A time before the white lightning and the bumming had turned him inside out . But these kids weren't like him . Oh crap ! ! He thought , Pull out of it , old son . These are just another couple of characters to roll . What they got , you get . Now forget all this other . `` Wanna drink '' ? ? Ernie offered , taking the pint of sweet lucy from his jacket pocket . `` Yeah . Now that you offer '' . The answer came from the open door of the boxcar . From the man who had leaped in from the high bank outside , as the train had slowed on the grade . Ernie stared at the man . He was big . Real big , with shoulders out to here , and hair all over him like a grizzly . Road gang , Ernie thought . `` You gonna give me a drink , fella '' ? ? The big man asked again , taking a step into the boxcar . Ernie hesitated a moment . This character could break him in half . `` Sure '' , he said , and lifted the pint to his own lips . He guzzled down three-quarters of the strong home-blend and proffered the remainder . The man stalked toward them , his big boots heavy on the wooden flooring . He took the bottle with undue belligerence , and making sucking noises with his thick lips , drained it completely . He threw his head back , closed his eyes , and belched ferociously . He belched again , and opening his eyes , threw the bottle out the open door . `` Well , now '' , he said , and reached into his pocket . `` I didn't know I was gonna have company in this car '' . `` We're going to Philadelphia '' , Kitty said , pulling her skirt down around her legs all the more . `` No , I don't think so '' , said the big man , and it was the final clincher for Ernie . He had suspected this guy was trouble , and now he was sure of it . `` Maybe you and me will , girlie , but these two ain't goin' nowhere '' . He advanced on them , and abruptly there was a shocked electricity in the car . Ernie was screaming inside himself : No , damn you , you ain't gonna take my meal ticket away from me ! ! The newcomer stalked toward them , and Kitty shied back , her hand to her mouth . Her scream split up the silence of the car , accompanied by the rattling of the freight , and then Cappy came off the floor , his legs driving him hard . The kid hit the bigger man with an audible thwump ! ! And carried him backward in a footballer's tackle . They went down in a heap and for a long minute there was nothing to see but flailing arms and legs . The kid showed for an instant , and his arm was cocked back . The fist went down into the pile of flesh , and Ernie heard the bigger man's deeper voice go , `` Aaawww '' ! ! Then they were tumbling again , and the big man reached into the same pocket he had gone for earlier , and came up with a vicious switchblade . He held the knife aloft an instant -- an instant enough to press the stud . The blade came out with a snick ! ! He fisted the knife overhand , and drew back to plunge it into the kid's throat . Kitty screamed insanely and her face was white . She grabbed at Feathertop's sleeve and shrieked , `` Help him ! ! Help him ! ! Do something '' ! ! It was among these that Hinkle identified a photograph of Barco ! ! For it seems that Barco , fancying himself a ladies' man ( and why not , after seven marriages ? ? ) , had listed himself for Mormon Beard roles at the instigation of his fourth murder victim who had said : `` With your beard , dear , you ought to be in movies '' ! ! Mills secured Barco's photograph from the gentleman in charge , rushed to the Hollywood police station to report the theft , and less than five minutes later , detectives with his picture in hand were on the trail of Cal Barco . On their way , they stopped at every gas station along the main boulevards to question the attendants . Finally , at Ye Olde Gasse Filling Station on Avocado Avenue , they learned that their man , having paused to get oil for his car , had asked about the route to San Diego . They headed in that direction and , at San Juan Capistrano By-the-Sea came upon Barco sitting in the quaint old Spanish Mission Drive-in , eating a hot tamale . At the moment , Barco's back was to the road so he didn't see the detectives close in on his convertible which , in their quest for the stolen lap rug , they proceeded to search . The robe , however , was missing , for by that time Barco had disposed of it at a pawnshop in Glendale . The detectives placed Barco under arrest and , without informing him of the nature of the charge , took him back to Hollywood for questioning . Thus it was that Barco , apprehended for mere larceny , now began to suspect that one or another of his murders had been uncovered . During the return trip , Barco kept muttering to himself in meaningless phrases , such as : `` They're under sand dunes They're better off , I tell you I saved their souls '' . The detective , commenting on Barco's behavior , felt that he merely belonged among the myriad citizens of our community who are mentally unhinged -- that he was a more or less harmless `` nut '' ! ! However while in his cell awaiting trial for theft , Barco , in a fit of apprehension , made an attempt to take his own life . The attempt had failed because , when endeavoring to cut his wrists , this murderer of seven women had fainted at the sight of blood . The jail authorities -- attaching no particular significance to the episode -- offered Barco whisky to revive him ; ; but the old fellow , a lifelong teetotaler , refused it , and no more was thought of the matter . Then it was that District Attorney Welch entered the case . A man of vaulting ambition , with one eye on the mayorship of Los Angeles , nothing ever escaped him which might possibly lead to personal publicity . It was reported to Welch's office that a thief in the city jail had attempted suicide . Welch wanted to know why . No one knew . Now Welch had a pet theory that everyone is guilty of breaking more laws than he ever gets caught at . The suicide attempt looked to him like an opportunity to put his theory to the test . So he paid a call on Barco in his cell and began their chat by stating bluntly : `` Barco , we've got the goods on you ! ! It'll be a lot better if you come clean '' . At first Barco was evasive and shifty . But with Welch's relentless pursuit of the subject , Barco finally `` broke '' and started confessing to one murder after another . By the time Barco reached the count of three , the situation seemed to Welch almost too good to be true . But if true , it was the case of which he had dreamed , the case which would throw him into headlines all over America as the hero of a great murder trial . Welch summoned jail officials to Barco's cell . But to Welch's chagrin , the police captain pooh-poohed Welch's credulity in Barco's confession . Barco was clearly a `` nut '' . It required strength , bravado , daring to commit murder . `` That worm a murderer ? ? Ridiculous '' ! ! Then , for the first time since his arrest , a glint of spirit lit Barco's eyes . His manhood had been attacked . He stiffened and rose to his feet . He'd show them ! ! `` Is that so '' ? ? He queried . `` Well , for ten years I've been murdering women . I can lead you to every one of the bodies , and there ain't four , nor five , nor six of 'em -- there's seven ! ! '' The next day the police captain , in derision , organized what he termed `` Welch's Wild Goose Chase '' . For indeed it seemed incredible that anyone could go on committing murder for ten years and not get caught at it , even in Hollywood . The searching party consisted of the police captain , Welch , Barco , policemen with shovels , newspaper reporters , and cameramen . Barco , his state of apprehension gone , never to return , had assumed a matter-of-factness which remained his principal attitude from that time on . He directed the cortege of autos to the sand dunes near Santa Monica . Stopping the cars at a fork in the road , he got out , paced off a certain distance to a spot between two shrub-covered sand hills , and indicated a location . Orders were given to dig . Nothing was found . Welch was worried . The police captain chortled . The newspaper boys cracked jokes and again Barco's pride was aroused . With greater precision he again paced off a location , this time a little more to the left . With quibs and gibes , the policemen again started digging . Welch was on edge . The captain was remarking that it was a nice day for a picnic when finally one of the shovels struck an object . `` There's something here '' ! ! Said the digger . Joking stopped and everyone gathered around . The digger , thrusting about with his shovel , now raised into view a package crudely wrapped in one of the murderer's Hollywood sport shirts . Although it was a mere fragment of the victim's remains , it was enough . Welch was wild with delight . His elation grew as Barco's seven disclosures brought to light one reward after another . Now did Welch truly become the man of the hour , and everything that followed in the procedure of Justice was a new triumph for him . It went to his head , and his ambition increased . It was apparent that Welch was in cahoots with Marshall and would use his power as D.A. to drag every possible sensation into the case . Every new scandal which would provide more `` copy '' for Marshall's pen would thus mean more publicity for Welch . I knew that both these cynics were waiting with impatience for the dramatic moment when Viola was called to the stand . Once there , the D.A. with devilish cleverness would provide Marshall with headlines : `` Viola's Multiple Romances '' `` Viola Lake an Addict '' `` Downfall of Another Film Idol '' ! ! It would be fine publicity for the man who was willing to walk to the mayor's throne over the broken reputation of a helpless girl ! ! I studied Welch closely as the trial progressed for any hint which might give me a lead as to how he might be thwarted . It wasn't long before I sensed that there was something deeper than overvaulting ambition back of his desire for Viola's destruction . He was bitter and resentful toward her , personally resentful . A dreadful fear entered my consciousness that perhaps he had entertained aspirations toward Viola's favors -- or , even more serious perhaps , that he had attained a share of them and had then been superseded by some luckier chap . I did not rest until I had tracked the mystery down . Well , here it is . One day over a year before , there had been a cocktail party in an apartment of a downtown hotel . Viola had been urged to attend , by telephone , and not knowing the host or the character of the party , she had gone . She arrived late and as she entered the party , noted that gentlemen seemed to be in the majority ; ; the air was thick with smoke , empty bottles were in evidence , and several of the guests were somewhat the worse for liquor . Naturally , Viola had no wish to remain , but she felt she couldn't leave so soon after her arrival , in all politeness to her host . And it so happened that adjacent to a couch on which she had taken refuge was a small table on which she noted a vase of red rosebuds ; ; while projecting from beneath the couch were a pair of feet which , as Fate would have it , belonged to District Attorney Welch . As Viola sat there , a playful impulse overcame her to remove the shoes and socks from the unidentified feet and , as a prank , insert rosebuds between the toes . A little later the district attorney woke up , emerged from under the couch , looked at his watch , and realized he had an engagement that very hour to address a meeting of the Culture Forum on `` The Civic Spirit of the Southland '' , in the Byzantine room of the hotel where his wife , as president of the forum , was to preside . He made his way to his host's bedroom where he carefully brushed himself off , neatly arranged his hair , and painstakingly selected his hat from the many on the bed . Then , noting neither the absence of his footwear nor the presence of the rosebuds , he made his way to the Byzantine room and , with his usual dignity , mounted the rostrum . The effect on the intellectuals among his audience may well be imagined . The incident , aside from reflecting on Welch's political career , had all but wrecked his home life . He never rested until he discovered who the culprit was , and when he did , he vowed vengeance on Viola Lake if ever the chance came his way . And here it was ! ! By such innocent actions are human tragedies sometimes set in motion . During these first days of the trial I didn't have as much time to commiserate with Viola as I should have liked . In the first place , it was difficult for us to meet . We couldn't be seen together , for the tongue of Scandal was ever ready to link our names , and the tongue of Scandal finds but one thing to say of the association of a man with a girl , no matter how innocent . I couldn't invite Viola to our house , for Mother snobbishly refused to receive her . Now the Czarship had not affected my own sense of social values , but Mother had attained a reflected glory through it , which had opened the doors of Los Angeles-Pasadena Society to her . There , Mother was received by the scions of aristocratic lines which are dominated by the Budweisers ( of beer derivation ) , the Chalmers ( of underwear origin ) , and the Heinzes ( whose forbears founded a nationally famous trade in pickles ) . I hated being dragged into the salons of these aristocrats . But Mother insisted , for it is seldom indeed that anyone remotely connected with the cinema is ever received in their exclusive midsts . In fact , it was not until the King of Spain had visited at Pickfair that Mary and Doug were beckoned to cross the sacred barriers which separate Los Angeles and Pasadena from the hoi-polloi . Mother even went so far as to trump up for me matrimonial opportunities with Pasadena debs who had been educated abroad , and with those of the more lenient Los Angeles area where a debutante was a girl who had been to high school . But at long last came a time when I broke away from Mother and her society `` chi-chi '' in order to spend a cosy evening with Viola and her chaperon at her home . However , such a hotbed of gossip had grown up during the trial , that every precaution had to be taken to keep my visit from being whispered to the world , Society , and even , alas , to my own mother . When I arrived at Viola's I was shown , to my surprise , into the kitchen . Viola greeted me , in checked apron , ladle in hand , and explained it was the cook's night out and that she herself was preparing dinner . I sat and watched proceedings . There was to be roast chicken with dressing , giblet gravy , asparagus , new peas with a sprig of mint , creamed onions , and mashed potatoes -- all chosen , prepared , and cooked by Viola herself . I realized that Hamlet was faced with an entirely different problem , but his agony could have been no greater . The most that was accomplished was adding Mrs. Beige's tray to the dish pile , and by means of repeated threats , on an ascending scale , seeing that the girls dressed themselves , after a fashion . I was saved from making the decision as the phone rang , and the girls were upon me instantly . Here's a household hint : if you can't find your children , and get tired of calling them , pick up the phone . No matter if your children are at the movies , in school , visiting their grandmother , or on a field trip in some distant city , they will be upon you magically within seconds after you pick up the phone . Jennie and Miranda twined themselves around me , murmuring endearments . Louise climbed onto a stool and clutched the hand with which I was trying to hold the phone , claiming my immediate attention on grounds of extreme emergency . Somehow managing to get out a cool , poised , `` Won't you hold on a second , please '' , I covered up the mouthpiece , and with more warmth and less poise , gave a quick lecture on crime and punishment , mostly the latter , including Devil's Island and the remoter reaches of Siberia . I promised to illustrate the lecture , if they so much as breathed till after the call was completed . Speaking into the phone again and recognizing the caller , I resumed my everyday voice . Soon we were deep in a conversation that was interrupted many times by little things like Jennie's holding her breath and pretending to black out , Miranda's dumping the contents of the sugar bowl on the table , and various screeches , thuds , and giggles . Under the circumstances , I had difficulty keeping up with the conversation on the phone , but when I hung up I was reasonably certain that Francesca had wanted to remind me of our town meeting the next evening , and how important it was that Hank and I be there . I discovered that the girls had shrewdly vacated the kitchen , and were playing quietly in the living room . It seemed that I would be the gainer if I accepted the peace and quiet , instead of carrying out my threats . Resolving to get something done , I started in on the dishes . No . I'm not saying it right . What I meant to say was that I started to start in on the dishes by gathering them all together in the kitchen sink . They looked so formidable , however , so demanding , that I found myself staring at them in dismay and starting to woolgather again , this time about Francesca and her husband . How about them , I thought . Francesca and Herbert were among the few people we knew in Catatonia . We didn't even know them till about a month after we moved -- at that time , they had called on us , after I met Fran at a PTA meeting , and had taken us in hand socially . They had been kind to us and we were indebted to them for one or two pleasant dinners , and for information as to where to shop , which dentist , doctor , plumber , and sitter to call ( not that there was much of a choice , since Catatonia was just a village ; ; the yellow pages of the telephone book were amazingly thin ) . They were `` personalities '' . Herb , an expert on narrow ties , thin lapels , and swatches , was men's fashion editor of Parvenu , the weekly magazine with the tremendous circulation . Fran and he had met about two years after she had arrived in Manhattan from Nebraska , or was it Wyoming ? ? She was the daughter and sole heiress of either a cattle baron or an oil millionaire and , having arrived in New York with a big bank roll , became a dabbler in various fields . She patronized Greenwich Village artists for awhile , then put some money into a Broadway show which was successful ( terrible , but successful ) . It was during her `` writing '' period that she and Herb met and decided that they were in love . They were married at a lavish ceremony which was duly recorded in Parvenu and all other magazines and newspapers , and then they honeymooned in Bermuda . No , not Bermuda . Bermuda was not in style that year . They had honeymooned in Rome ; ; everyone was very high on Rome that year . They had bought their house in Catatonia after investigating all the regions of suburbia surrounding New York ; ; they had chosen Catatonia because of its reputation for excellent schools , beaches , and abundance of names . `` You are bound to get involved with people when you have children '' , Fran had told me at our first meeting , `` so it is good to know that those with whom you get involved are not just dreary little housewives and dull husbands , but People Who Do Things '' . I admired their easy way of doing things but I couldn't escape an uneasiness at their way of always doing the right things . Their house was a centuries-old Colonial which they had had restored ( guided by an eminent architect ) and updated , and added on to . It had a gourmet's corner ( instead of a kitchen ) , a breakfast room , a luncheon room , a dining room , a sitting room , a room for standing up , a party room , dressing rooms for everybody , even a room for mud . It was all set up so there would be no dust anywhere and so that their children would color in the coloring room , paint in the painting room , play with blocks in the block house , and do all the other things in the proper rooms at exactly the right time . Their two boys were `` well adjusted '' and , like their parents , always did the right thing at the right time and damn the consequences . Francesca and Herbert considered themselves violently nonconformist and showed the world they were by filling their Colonial house with contemporary furniture and paintings and other art objects ( expensive , but not necessarily valuable , contemporary things ) . Fran flaunted her independence by rebelling against the Catatonia uniform of Bermuda shorts and knee-length socks by wearing Bermuda shorts and knee-length socks in colors ; ; bright pinks and plaids and vivid stripes . Sometimes she even wore the uniform in solid , unrelieved black , and with her blonde hair cut so closely , wearing this uniform , she strongly resembled a member of the SS. . No one could dislike them , I thought . Sometimes , though , they did not seem quite human . It seemed , indeed , that their house was not so much a home , but rather a perfect stage set , and that they were actors who had been handed fat roles in a successful play , and had talent enough to fill the roles competently , with nice understatement . Practically the only enthusiasm they showed was when they were discussing `` names '' ; ; even brand names . You should hear the reverence in Fran's voice when she said `` Baccarat '' or `` Steuben '' or `` Madame Alexander '' . She always let it be known that there was wine in the pot roast or that the chicken had been marinated in brandy , and that Koussevitzky's second cousin was an intimate of theirs . I wouldn't have wasted time puzzling over this couple were it not for my fear that all the other inhabitants of Catatonia were equally unreal . I couldn't feel at home among them . Besides Francesca , there was Blanche . Francesca was pleasant and charming , but Blanche was sweet . Yes , Blanche was very , very sweet -- being in her company was like being drowned in warm , melted marshmallows . I had once been a witness when Blanche had smiled and said with only minimum ruefulness , `` Oh , my souffle has collapsed '' . Anyone knows how a real , red-blooded woman would react to such a catastrophe ! ! If Blanche had been honest , she would have yelled , slammed at least a couple of doors , and thrown a few little , valueless things . But dear me , no ; ; not Blanche . After five minutes with Blanche , one might welcome the astringency of Grazie , who was a sort of Gwen Cafritz to Francesca's Perle Mesta . Francesca and Grazie were habitual committee chairmen and they usually managed to be elected co-chairmen , equal bosses , of whatever PTA or civic project was being launched . They were inseparable , not because they were fond of each other , but because they wanted to keep an eye on each other , as they were keen rivals for social leadership . Grazie was mean : quietly mean , and bitterly , unfunnily sarcastic . She it was who had looked to see if I was wearing shoes upon learning that I couldn't drive . Grazie had a small , slick head and her hair and skin were the color of golden toast . She lived in an ultra-modern house whose decoration , appointments , paint , and even pets were chosen to complement her coloring ; ; the pets were a couple of Siamese cats . Her uniform was of rich , raw silk , in a shade which matched her hair , skin , housepaint , and cats , and since she was so thin as to be almost shapeless , she rather resembled a frozen fish stick . The husbands of these women and others I had met in Catatonia were distinguished only in that they were , to me at least , indistinguishable . I couldn't tell one from the other . Like Herbert , they were all in communications : radio , television , magazines , and advertising . One or two were writers of books ; ; all were fellows of finite charm . Each had developed a hair-trigger chuckle and the habit of saying `` zounds '' ! ! In deference to country-squirehood . I never thought I'd live to hear people chuckle and say `` zounds '' ! ! In real life . I wouldn't have missed it for anything . They were `` sincere '' -- men of the too-hearty handclasp and the urgent smile . These boys acknowledged an introduction to anybody by gently pressing one of his hands in both of theirs , while they gazed , misty-eyed with care , into the eyes of the person they were meeting . Could such unadulterated love , for a total stranger , be credited ? ? They were always leaping to light cigarettes , open car doors , fill plates or glasses , and I mistrusted the whole lot of them to the same degree that I mistrusted bake shops that called themselves `` Sanitary Bake Shops '' . `` O ! ! Pioneers ! ! '' I thought , and wondered what kind of homesteads such odd pioneers would establish in this suburban frontier ; ; pioneers who looked like off-duty gardeners even at parent-teacher conferences and who never called the school principal `` Mister '' . I sighed , thinking that among other things , people here seemed to be those who would have to cut down if they earned less than $85,000 yearly ; ; people who would give their teeth for a chance to get on `` Person to Person '' ; ; people who thought it was nice to be important , but not important to be nice ; ; who were more ingratiating than gracious , more personalities than persons . In my estimation , they were people who read Daphne du Maurier , and discussed Kafka ; ; well , not discussed him exactly , but said , `` Kafka '' ! ! Reverently and raised their eyes , as if they were at a loss to describe how they felt about Kafka , which they were , because they had no opinions about Kafka , not having read Kafka . They were , I felt , people invariably trying to prove not who , but what they were , and trying to determine what , not who , others were . Becoming aware that it was nearly lunchtime , I brought myself back to the tasks at hand . I made plans for the afternoon -- doing the breakfast and luncheon dishes all at once , making the beds , and then maybe painting the kitchen . Then , I remembered that the girls had had a banana for dessert every day for the last week . `` Bananas '' ! ! Jennie had shouted each time . `` They're not dessert ! ! They're not even food . They're just something you're supposed to put on cereal for breakfast '' . I dug around and found a mix , and was able to surprise them with a devil's-food cake with chocolate icing . ( Sometimes I think you need only one rule for cooking : if you can't put garlic in it , put chocolate in it . ) The cake was received in a stunned silence that was evidence in itself of the dearth of taste thrills Mama had been providing . Then Jennie closed her eyes , stretched forth her arms , and said : `` Take my hand , Louise ; ; I'm a stranger in paradise '' . Needless to say , I was furious at this unparalleled intrusion upon free enterprise . How dared they demand to `` snoop '' in private financial records , disbursements , confidential contracts and agreements ? ? `` It is as though '' , I said on the historic three-hour , coast-to-coast radio broadcast which I bought ( following Father Coughlin and pre-empting the Eddie Cantor , Manhattan Merry-go-round and Major Bowes shows ) `` That Man in the White House , like some despot of yore , insisted on reading my diary , raiding my larder and ransacking my lingerie ! ! '' My impassioned plea for civil rights created a landslide of correspondence and one sponsor even asked me to consider replacing the Eddie Cantor comedy hour on a permanent basis . But what quarter could a poor defenseless woman expect from a dictator who would even make so bold as to close all of the banks in our great nation ? ? The savage barbarian hordes of red Russian Communism descended on the Athens that was mighty Metronome , sacking and despoiling with their Bolshevistic battle cry of `` Soak the rich ' ! ! After an unspeakable siege , lasting the better part of two months , it was announced that the studio `` owed '' the government a tax debt in excess of eight million dollars while I , who had always remained aloof from such iniquitous practices as paying taxes on the salary I had earned and the little I legally inherited as Morris' helpless relict , was `` stung '' with a personal bill of such astronomical proportions as to `` wipe out '' all but a fraction of my poor , hard-come-by savings . I was also publicly reprimanded , dragged through the mud by the radical press and made a figure of fun by such leftist publications as The New Republic , The New Yorker , Time and The Christian Science Monitor . It was then that I availed myself of the rights of a citizen and declared the income tax unconstitutional . The litigation was costly and seemingly endless . I fought like a tigress but by the time I appealed my case to the Supreme Court ( 1937 ) , Mr. Roosevelt and his `` henchmen '' had done their `` dirty work '' all too well , even going so far as to attempt to `` pack '' the highest tribunal in the land in order to defeat little me . Presidential coercion had succeeded not only in poisoning the courtiers , `` toadies '' and sycophants of the `` bench '' against me , but it had been so far-reaching as to discourage any lawyer in the nation from representing me ! ! I was ready , like Portia , to present my own brief . But the Supreme Court wouldn't even hear my case ! ! My plea was unanimously voted down and `` thrown out '' . Again , my name was on all the front pages . I was , it seemed , persona non grata in every quarter , but not entirely without a staunch following of noted political thinkers and students of jurisprudence . As Charles Evans Hughes said , `` Miss Poitrine's limitations as an actress are exceeded only by her logic as a litigant '' . Albert Einstein was quoted as saying : `` The workings of the woman's mind amaze me '' . Henry Ford spoke of me as `` utterly astounding '' . Heywood Broun wrote : `` Belle Poitrine is the most original thinker since Caligula '' , and even F.D.R. had to concede that `` if the rest of this nation showed the foresight and patriotism of Miss Poitrine , America would rapidly resemble ancient Babylon and Nineveh '' . Not only were the court costs prohibitive , but I was subjected to crippling fines , in addition to usurious interest on the unpaid `` debts '' which the government claimed that Metronome and I owed -- a severe financial blow . Nor , as Manny said , had the notoriety done my career `` any good '' . My enemies were only too anxious to level against me such charges as `` reactionary '' , `` robber baroness '' , and even `` traitor '' ! ! Traitor indeed ! ! I point now with pride to the fact that , long ere the Committee on Un-American Activities , the Minute Women , the Economic Council and other such notable `` watchdog '' organizations were so much as heard of , I was Hollywood's leading bulwark against communism , fighting single-handedly `` creeping socialism '' against such insuperable odds as the Fascio-Communist troops of the NRA , PWA , WPA , CCC and an army of more than twenty-two million mercenaries whom F.D.R. employed secretly , through the transparent ruse of regular `` relief '' checks . Needless to say , my art suffered drastically during this turbulent period . Could it do otherwise ? ? Even though I have always had a genius for `` throwing myself '' into every role and `` playing it for all it's worth '' , no actress can be expected to do her best work when her fortune , her reputation , her livelihood , her home and her nation itself are all imperilled . Such sweeping distractions are hardly conducive to `` Oscar '' winning performances . I tried my hardest , with little help , may I say , from my husband and leading man , but somehow the outside pressures were too severe . Having ( through my unflagging effort and devotion ) achieved stardom , a fortune and a world-renowned wife at an age when most young men are casting their first vote , Letch proceeded to neglect them all . Never a `` quick study '' , he now made no attempt to learn his `` lines '' and many a mile of film was wasted , many a scene -- sometimes involving as many as a thousand fellow thespians -- was taken thirty , forty , fifty times because Miss Poitrine's co-star and `` helpmate '' had never learned his part . Each time Letch `` went up '' in his `` lines '' , I was the one to be patient , helpful and apologetic while he indulged in outbursts of temperament , profanity and abuse , blaming others , going into `` sulks '' and , on more occasions than I care to count , storming off the `` set '' for the rest of the day . As for his finances , I was never privileged to know exactly how much money Letch had `` salted away '' . It was I who paid for our little home , the food , the liquor , the servants -- even Letch's bills at his tailor and the Los Angeles Athletic Club . Never once did he buy me a single gift and for our third anniversary he gave me a dislocated jaw . ( But that is another story . ) As for his private monies , they were rapidly dissipated in drinking , gaming and carousing . More than once I was confronted by professional gamblers , `` bookies '' , loan `` sharks '' , gangsters , `` thugs '' and `` finger men '' -- people of a class I did not even know existed -- to repay my husband's staggering losses , `` or else '' I shuddered to think that someone so dear to me could even associate with such a sinister milieu . And at three different times during our turbulent marriage strange girls , with the commonest of accents , telephoned to announce to me that Letch had sired their unborn children ! ! Having the deepest of maternal instincts , my heart fairly bled when I thought of the darling pink and white `` bundles from heaven '' I would have proudly given my husband . `` Ah , you're too old '' , was invariably his ungallant and untrue retort whenever I suggested `` starting a family '' . Letch had made it abundantly clear that he did not care for the company of my own precious daughter . I now felt it wiser to keep Baby-dear in school and -- during the summers -- at a camp run by the Society of Friends all year around . Her presence only made Letch more distant and irritable and , in the hurry of buying Chateau Belletch , I had neglected to consider a room for Baby-dear , so there was no place to put her , anyhow . ( I sometimes feel that God , in His infinite wisdom , wants us to have these inexplicable little lapses of memory . It almost always works out for the best . ) Yet I adored this man , Letch Feeley , why , I cannot say . With faint heart and a brave smile , I endured his long absences from Chateau Belletch , his coldness , his indifference , his slights and his abuse . The times I can recall when I was publicly humiliated by him -- lovely dinner parties in our Trianon Suite where the collation was postponed and postponed and postponed , only to be served dry and overcooked at a table where the host's chair was vacant ; ; a `` splash party '' at the new pool , which I had built in the hope of keeping Letch away from public beaches , when Letch and a certain Aquacutie stayed underwater together for the better part of an hour ; ; a lovely Epiphany party at Errol Flynn's , on which sacred occasion Letch stole away with an unknown `` starlet '' , leaving me `` high and dry '' to get home as best I could . These are but a sampling of the insults I endured . As Mrs. Letch Feeley , was it any wonder that I , once the social arbiter of Filmdom , was excluded from the smart entertainments given by the Astaires , the Coopers , the Gables , the Colmans , the Rathbones , the Taylors , the Thalbergs and such devout , closely knit families as the Barrymores and the Crosbys ? ? As Letch's antisocial conduct increased , our invitations decreased and my heart was in my mouth whenever I played hostess at a fashionable `` screenland '' gathering . Between 1935 and 1939 Letch and I made ten films together , each less successful , both artistically and commercially , than the one before it . Our last joint venture , Sainted Lady , a deeply religious film based on the life of Mother Cabrini , and timed so that its release date would coincide with the beatification of America's first saint in November , 1938 , was a fiasco from start to finish . As I was playing Mother Cabrini , the picture was actually `` all mine '' , with nearly every scene built around me . But in order to keep Letch in the public eye and out of trouble , I wrote in a part especially for him -- that of a dashing ruffian who `` sees the light '' and is saved by the inspiring example of Mother Cabrini . And did he appreciate my efforts on his behalf ? ? Did he trouble to memorize the very small part which I had `` tailor-made '' to his specifications , a role eventually cut down to three short speeches ? ? Did he show the rest of the cast -- numbering four thousand -- the consideration of arriving at the studio punctually -- or even at all ? ? He did not ! ! The `` shooting '' went on for eight months ! ! Most of our working days were spent on the telephone calling `` bookies '' , illegal gambling dens , a certain `` residential club for young actresses '' , more than a hundred different bars or the steam room of the athletic club . Whenever he deigned to appear at the studio he was `` hung over '' , uncooperative , rude and insulting . He made many tasteless , irreverent and unfunny remarks , not only about me in the title role , but about religion in general . By the time the film was released we were three million dollars over-spent , war was imminent and the public apparently had forgotten all about Mother Cabrini . Thanks to Letch Feeley and the terrible strain he imposed on me , the notices were few and unfavorable . Only George Santayana seemed to understand and appreciate the film when he wrote : `` Miss Poitrine has perpetrated the most eloquent argument for the Protestant faith yet unleashed by Hollywood '' . But it was small consolation . In a rare fit of anger and spite , I `` farmed out '' my own husband to a small and most undistinguished studio to make one picture as a form of punishment . ( An actor must have discipline . ) The film was called The Diet of Worms , which I felt was just what Letch deserved . It turned out to be a life of Martin Luther , of all things ! ! It was a disaster ! ! In clothes , Letch simply did not project . He was laughed off the screen . At the same time , however , I availed myself of the services of that great English actor and master of make-up , Sir Gauntley Pratt , to do a `` quickie '' called The Mystery of the Mad Marquess , in which I played a young American girl who inherits a haunted castle on the English moors which is filled with secret passages and sliding panels and , unbeknownst to anyone , is still occupied by an eccentric maniac . It was a `` potboiler '' made on a `` shoestring '' and not the sort of film I like , as all I had to do was look blank and scream a great deal . My heart was not in it , but , oddly enough , it remains the most financially successful picture of my career . ( I watched it on television late one night last week and it `` stands up '' remarkably well , even twenty years later . ) Letch had returned from his debacle unrepentant and more badly behaved than before . I really loved that boy , and , in a feverish attempt to preserve our marriage and to try to revive the wonderful , wonderful person Letch had once been , I took my troubles to Momma , hoping that her earthy advice would help me . `` If I could only think of something at the studio , near me , to absorb his boundless energy '' , I said . `` What is Letch interested in '' ? ? `` Bookies , booze and babes '' , Momma said bluntly . Her reply stung me , but this was too important to let my hurt make any difference . `` I can't turn the studio into a gambling hell or a saloon '' , I said . Up to date , however , his garden was still more or less of a mess , he hadn't even started his workshop and if there was a meadow pond in the neighborhood he hadn't found it . It wasn't his fault that these things were so . The difficulty was that each day seemed to produce its quota of details which must be cleaned up immediately . As a result , life had become a kind of continuous make-ready . Once he disposed of these items which screamed so harshly for attention , he could undertake the things which really counted . Then , at last , his day would fall into an ordered pattern and he would be free to read , or garden or just wander through the woods in the late afternoon , accompanied by his dogs . His dogs ? ? He had almost forgotten them , although they had played such an important part in his early dreams . Then they had always been romping around him on these walks , yelping with delight , dashing off into the bushes on fruitless hunting expeditions , returning to jump up on him triumphantly with muddy paws . Dogs did something to one's ego . They were constantly assuring you that you were one of the world's great guys . Regardless of how much of a slob you knew yourself to be , you could be certain they would never find out -- and even if they did it would make no difference . Now it became increasingly apparent that there were to be no dogs in the picture . What in the world were you going to do with a lot of dogs when you left for town on Monday afternoons ? ? You certainly couldn't take them into the little apartment and if you tried to farm them out for two or three days every week they would become so confused that they would have nervous breakdowns . Why in the world couldn't he live in one place the way everyone else seemed to ? ? It worried him , this inability to get the simplest things done in the course of a day . He would wake up in the middle of the night and fret about it . How in the world had he formerly found time to build up a business , raise a family , be on half a dozen boards , work actively on committees and either go out in the evening or plow through the contents of a bulging brief case ? ? Was it possible that as people grow older the nature of time changed ? ? Could it be that it speeded up for the aged in some mysterious way , as if a bored universe were skipping through the end of the chapter just to get it over with ? ? Or was the answer less metaphysical ? ? Did older people work more slowly ? ? Did it take a man of sixty-five longer to write a letter , shave , clean out a barn , read a newspaper , than a man of thirty ? ? Did men become perfectionists as they grew older , polishing , polishing , reluctant to let go ? ? It might be that certain people were born with a compulsion to complicate their lives , while others could live blissfully motionless almost indefinitely , like lizards in the sun , too indolent to blink their eyes . Perhaps it was his misfortune , or good fortune , whichever way one looked at it , to belong to the former group , and he was struggling unconsciously to build up pressure in a world which demanded none , which was positively antagonistic to it . And then again perhaps the reason why he couldn't find time to do any of the things he had planned to do after retirement : reading , roaming , gardening , lying on his back and watching the clouds go by , was because he didn't want to do them . There was no compulsion behind them . They could be done or left undone and nobody really gave a damn . During all his busy life he had only done things which had to be done . This habit had become so fixed over the years that it seemed futile to do anything for which no one was waiting . He looked at the luminous dial of his wrist watch . It was five minutes after four . On some distant farm a rooster crowed and , far down the valley , an associate answered . He turned over impatiently and pulled the sheet over his head against the treacherous encroachment of the dawn . At least he could buy the equipment for his workshop . Thus committed , action might follow . He went down to Mills and Bradley's Hardware Store and bought a full set of carpenter's tools , including a rotary power saw and several other pieces of power machinery that Mr. Mills said were essential for babbiting and doweling , whatever they were . He also bought a huge square of pegboard for hanging up his tools , and lumber for his workbench , sandpaper and glue and assorted nails , levels and T squares and plumb lines and several gadgets that he had no idea how to use or what they were for . `` There '' , said Mr. Mills . `` That'll get you started . Best not to get everything at once . Add things as you find you need 'em '' . He didn't even ask the cost of this collection . After all , if you were going to set up a workshop you had to have the proper equipment and that was that . When he returned home , the station wagon loaded with tools , Jinny had gone with a friend to some meeting in the village , using the recently purchased second car . He was glad . It gave him a chance to unload the stuff and get it down to the cellar without a barrage of acid comments . He had made such a fuss about buying that second car that he knew he was vulnerable . He piled everything neatly in a corner of the cellar and turned to stare at the blank stone wall . That was where the pegboard would go on which he would hang his hand tools . In front of it would be his workbench . The old nightmare which had caused him so many wakeful hours came charging in on him once more , only this time he couldn't pacify it with a sleeping pill and send it away . How in the world did one attach a pegboard to a stone wall ? ? How did one attach anything to a stone wall , for that matter ? ? After the pegboard there would be the paneling . He sat down on an old box and focused on the problem . Perhaps one bored holes in the stone with some kind of an electric gadget . But then , when you stuck things into the holes , why didn't they come right out again ? ? It all seemed rather hopeless . He turned his attention to the workbench . Perhaps that was the first thing to do . A workbench had a heavy top and sturdy legs , but how did you attach sturdy legs to a heavy top so that the whole thing didn't wobble like a newborn calf and ultimately collapse when you leaned on it ? ? Mr. Mills had done some figuring on a scrap of paper and given him the various kinds of boards and two-by-fours which , properly handled , would , he had assured him , turn into a workbench . They lay on the cellar floor in a disorderly pile . Mr. Crombie poked at it gingerly with his foot . How could anyone know what to do with an assortment like that ? ? Perhaps he had better have someone help him put up the pegboard and build the workbench -- someone who knew what he was about . Then at least he would have a place to hang his tools and something to work on . After that everything should be simpler . He went upstairs to phone Crumb . To his amazement he reached him . Mr. Crumb was laid up with a bad cold . He didn't seem to think that attaching a pegboard to a stone wall was much of a problem and he tossed off the building of the worktable equally lightly . The only trouble was that he himself was tied up on the school job . That was why he hadn't been able to finish the porch . No , he didn't know of any handyman-carpenter . There wasn't any such thing any more . Carpenters all wanted steady work and at the moment every mother's son for twenty miles around that could hammer nails for twenty-five dollars a day was working on the school job . There was a fellow named Blatz over Smithtown way . Nobody liked to hire him because you never could tell when he was going to be taken drunk . Mr. Crumb would probably see him at Lodge Meeting the next night . If he was sober , which was doubtful , he'd have him get in touch with Mr. Crombie . Mr. Blatz had been at least sober enough to remember to telephone and he turned out to be the greatest boon that had come into Mr. Crombie's life since he moved to Highfield , in spite of the fact that he didn't work very fast or very long at a time , and he didn't like to work at all unless Mr. Crombie hung around and talked to him . He said he was the lonely type and working in a cellar you saw funny things coming out of the cracks in the wall if they wasn't nobody with you . So Mr. Crombie sat on a wooden box and talked in order to keep Mr. Blatz's mind from funny things . At the same time he watched carefully to see how one attached pegboards to stone walls , but Mr. Blatz was usually standing in his line of vision and it all seemed so simple that he didn't like to disclose his ignorance . While Mr. Blatz was putting up the pegboards and starting the workbench , Mr. Crombie told him of this idea about paneling the whole end of the cellar . Mr. Blatz agreed that this would be pretty . Without further discussion he appeared the next morning with a pile of boards sticking over the end of his light truck and proceeded with the paneling , which he then stained and waxed according to his taste . `` Now '' , he said , `` we got to put in some outlets for them power tools ; ; then a couple of fluorescent lamps over the workbench an' I guess we're about through down here '' . It all did look very efficient and shipshape . There was no question of that . `` By the way '' , said Mr. Blatz , packing his tools into a battered carrier , `` them power tools needs extra voltage . I guess you know about that . Before you use 'em the light company's got to run in a heavy line and you'll need a new fuse box for the extra circuits . That ain't too bad 'ceptin' the light company's so busy you can't ever get 'em to do nothin' '' . Instead of being depressed by this news , Mr. Crombie was actually relieved . At least the moment was postponed when he had to face the mystery of the power tools . He followed Mr. Blatz up the cellar stairs . As usual , Mrs. Crombie was standing in the midst of a confusion of cooking utensils . Mr. Blatz sat down in the only unoccupied kitchen chair . `` Well '' , he said , `` got your man fixed up nice down there . He oughta be able to build a new house with all them contraptions '' . Mr. Crombie watched his wife with an anxious expression . `` I was just sayin' to him that I'm all ready now for anything else you want done '' . Mr. Crombie couldn't remember his saying any such thing . `` Oh , that's wonderful '' , cried Mrs. Crombie . `` I have a thousand things for you to do . Doors that won't open , and doors that won't close and shelves and broken -- '' `` But those are the things I built the workshop for '' , protested Mr. Crombie . `` Those are the things I can do , now that I'm set up '' . `` I've been waiting to get these things done for months '' , she said . `` We won't live long enough if I wait for you , besides which you don't need to worry -- there'll be plenty more '' . But the discussion was academic . Mr. Blatz was already taking measurements for a shelf above the kitchen sink . Ambiguity Nothing in English has been ridiculed as much as the ambiguous use of words , unless it be the ambiguous use of sentences . Ben Franklin said , `` Clearly spoken , Mr. Fogg . You explain English by Greek '' . Richard Brinsley Sheridan said , `` I think the interpreter is the hardest to be understood of the two '' . And a witty American journalist remarked over a century ago what is even more true today , `` Many a writer seems to think he is never profound except when he can't understand his own meaning '' . There are many types of ambiguity and many of them have been described by rhetoricians under such names as amphibology , parisology , and other ologies . In common parlance they would be described as misses -- misinterpreters , misunderstanders , misdirectors and kindred misdeeds . One species of ambiguity tries to baffle by interweaving repetition . `` Did you or did you not say what I said you said , because Jane said you never said what I said '' ? ? Another woman , addressing Christmas cards , said to her husband : `` We sent them one last year but they didn't send us one , so they probably won't send us one this year because they'll think we won't send them one because they didn't last year , don't you think , or shall we '' ? ? Such ambiguous exercises compound confusion by making it worse compounded , and they are sometimes expanded until the cream of the jest sours . Ambiguity of a non-repetitious kind describes the dilemma one girl found herself in . `` I'm terribly upset '' , she told a girl-friend . `` I wrote Bill in my last letter to forget that I had told him that I didn't mean to reconsider my decision not to change my mind -- and he seems to have misunderstood me '' . Evidently Bill was another of those men who simply don't understand women . Another case involves a newspaper reporter who tripped up a politician . `` Mr. Jones , you may recall that we printed last week your denial of having retracted the contradiction of your original statement . Now would you care to have us say that you were misquoted in regard to it '' ? ? Questions like this , framed in verbal fog , are perhaps the only kind that have ever stumped an experienced politician . They recall Byron's classic comment : `` I wish he would explain his explanation '' . Similarly , when a reporter once questioned Lincoln in cryptic fashion , Lincoln refused to make any further statement . `` I fear explanations explanatory of things explained '' , he said , leaving the biter bit -- and bitter . The obscurity of politicians may not always be as innocent as it looks . `` Senator '' , said an interviewer , `` your constituents can't understand from your speech last night just how you stand on the question '' . `` Good '' ! ! Replied the Senator . `` It took me five hours to write it that way '' . The misplaced modifier is another species more honored in the observance of obscurity than in the breach . This creates an amusing effect because its position in a sentence seems to make it apply to the wrong word . A verse familiar to all grammarians is the quatrain : `` I saw a man once beat his wife When on a drunken spree . Now can you tell me who was drunk -- The man , his wife , or me '' ? ? The `` wooden-leg '' gag of vaudeville , another standby of this sort , had endless variations . `` There's a man outside with a wooden leg named Smith '' . `` What's the name of his other leg '' ? ? Another stock vaudeville gag ran : `` Mother is home sick in bed with the doctor '' . When radio came in , it continued the misplaced modifier in its routines as a standard device . `` Do you see that pretty girl standing next to the car with slacks on '' ? ? `` I see the girl but I don't see the car with slacks on '' . In recent years gagwriters have discovered this brand of blunder and thus the misplaced modifier has acquired a new habitat in the gagline . In one cartoon a family is shown outside a theater with the head of the family addressing the doorman : `` Excuse me , but when we came out we found that we had left my daughter's handbag and my wife's behind '' . Journalism supplies us with an endless run of such slips . Not long ago a newspaper advised those taking part in a contest that `` snapshots must be of a person not larger than Af inches '' . Classified ads are also chockfull of misrelated constructions . Readers of the Reader's Digest are familiar with such items which often appear in its lists of verbal slips , like the ad in a California paper that advertised `` House for rent . View takes in five counties , two bedrooms '' . Since brevity is the soul of ambiguity as well as wit , newspaper headlines continually provide us with amusing samples . `` Officials Meet on rubbish . Many Shapes in bathtubs . Son and Daughter of Local Couple Married '' . Apart from misplaced modifiers and headlinese , journalism contributes a wide variety of comic ambiguities in both editorial and advertising matter . A weekly newspaper reported a local romance : `` and the couple were married last Saturday , thus ending a friendship which began in their schooldays '' . An item in the letters column of a newspaper renewed a subscription , adding : `` I personally enjoy your newspaper as much as my husband '' . Then there was the caterer's ad which read : `` are you getting married or having an affair ? ? We have complete facilities to accommodate 200 people '' . The newspaper too is the favorite habitat of the anatomical . This slip is so-called because its semi-ambiguous English always seems to refer to a person's anatomy but never quite means what it seems to say . Samples : He walked in upon her invitation . She kissed him passionately upon his reappearance . He kissed her back . Not without good reason has the anatomical been called jocular journalese . In news items a man is less often shot in the body or head than in the suburbs . `` While Henry Morgan was escorting Miss Vera Green from the church social last Saturday night , a savage dog attacked them and bit Mr. Morgan on the public square '' . Such items recall the California journalist who reported an accident involving a movie star : `` The area in which Miss N -- was injured is spectacularly scenic '' . The double meaning in the anatomical made it a familiar vaudeville device , as in the gags of Weber and Fields . When a witness at court was asked if he had been kicked in the ensuing rumpus , he replied , `` No , it was in the stomach '' . Strangely enough , this always brought the house down . Apart from journalese and vaudeville gags , the anatomical is also found in jocular literature . A conscientious girl became the secretary of a doctor . Her first day at work she was puzzled by an entry in the doctor's notes on an emergency case . It read : `` Shot in the lumbar region '' . After a moment of thought , her mind cleared and , in the interest of clarity , she typed into the record : `` Shot in the woods '' . There are many grammatical misconstructions other than dangling modifiers and anatomicals which permit two different interpretations . At the home of a gourmet the new maid was instructed in the fine points of serving . `` I want the fish served whole , with head and tail '' , the epicure explained , `` and serve it with lemon in mouth '' . The maid demurred . `` That's silly -- lemon in mouth '' , she said . But since the gourmet insisted that it is done that way at the most fashionable dinners , the girl reluctantly agreed . So she brought the fish in whole , and she carried a lemon in her mouth . Another specimen of such double-entendre is illustrated by a woman in a department store . She said to the saleslady , `` I want a dress to put on around the house '' . The puzzled saleslady inquired , `` How large is your house , Madam '' ? ? This saleslady was a failure in the dress department and was transferred to the shoe department . When a customer asked for alligator shoes , she said , `` What size is your alligator '' ? ? The comic indefinite comprises an extensive class of comedy . One species is restricted to statements which are neither explicit nor precise regarding a particular person , place , time or thing . A woman met a famous author at a literary tea . `` Oh , I'm so delighted to meet you '' , she gushed . `` It was only the other day that I saw something of yours , about something or other , in some magazine '' . This baffling lack of distinct details recalls the secretary whose employer was leaving the office and told her what to answer if anyone called in his absence . `` I may be back '' , he explained , `` and then again , I may not '' . The girl nodded understandingly . `` Yes , sir '' , she said , `` is that definite '' ? ? An old-fashioned mother said to her modern daughter , `` You must have gotten in quite late last night , dear . Where were you '' ? ? The daughter replied , `` Oh , I had dinner with -- well , you don't know him but he's awfully nice -- and we went to a couple of places -- I don't suppose you've heard of them -- and we finished up at a cute little night club -- I forget the name of it . Why , it's all right , isn't it , Mother '' ? ? Her woolly-minded parent agreed . `` Of course , dear '' , she said . `` It's only that I like to know where you go '' . No less ambiguous was the indefinity of a certain clergyman's sermon . `` Dearly beloved '' , he preached , `` unless you repent of your sins in a measure , and become converted to a degree , you will , I regret to say , be damned to a more or less extent '' . This clergyman should have referred to Shakespeare's dictum : `` So-so is a good , very good , very excellent maxim . And yet it is not . It is but so-so '' . Indefinite reference also carries double-meaning where an allusion to one person or thing seems to refer to another . A news item described the launching of a ship : `` Completing the ceremony , the beautiful movie star smashed a bottle of champagne over her stern as she slid gracefully down the ways into the sea '' . This is not unlike the order received by the sergeant of an army motor pool : `` Four trucks to Fort Mason gym , 7:30 tonight , for hauling girls to dance . The bodies must be cleaned and seats wiped off '' . A politician was approached by a man seeking the office of a minor public official who had just died . `` What are my chances for taking Joe's place '' ? ? He asked . `` If you can fix it up with the undertaker '' , returned the politician , `` it's all right with me '' . The manager of a movie theater received a telephone call from a woman who was equally indefinite . `` What have you got on today '' ? ? She inquired . `` A blue suit '' , he answered . `` Who's in it '' ? ? She continued . `` I am '' , he said . There was a short pause for reflection . `` Oh '' , said the woman , `` I've seen that picture already '' . Another brand of indefinite reference arises out of the use of the double verb . When a question contains two verbs , the response does not make clear which of them is being answered . The moonlit night was made for romance , and he had been looking at her soulfully for some time . Finally he asked , `` Do you object to petting '' ? ? `` That's one thing I've never done '' , she said promptly . He thought a moment , then inquired , `` You mean petted '' ? ? `` No '' , she smiled , `` objected '' . Replies to requests for character reference are notorious for their evasive double-entendre . It would be hard to find anything more equivocal than : `` I cannot recommend him too highly '' . Another less ambiguous case read as follows : `` The bearer of this letter has served me for two years to his complete satisfaction . If you are thinking of giving him a berth , be sure to make it a wide one '' . In the comedy of indefinite reference , it-wit occupies a prominent place because of its frequent occurrence . Ambiguity arises when the pronoun it carries a twofold reference . Two friends were talking . One said , `` When I get a cold I buy a bottle of whiskey for it , and within a few hours it's gone '' . The speaker referred to the whiskey but his friend thought he meant the cold . It-wit is a misnomer because it covers slips as well as wit . An excited woman was making an emergency call over the phone : `` Doctor , please come over right away . My husband is in great pain . I called the other afternoon on my old friend , Graves Moreland , the Anglo-American literary critic -- his mother was born in Ohio -- who lives alone in a fairy-tale cottage on the Upson Downs , raising hell and peacocks , the former only when the venerable gentleman becomes an angry old man about the state of literature or something else that is dwindling and diminishing , such as human stature , hope , and humor . My unscientific friend does not believe that human stature is measurable in terms of speed , momentum , weightlessness , or distance from earth , but is a matter of the development of the human mind . After Gagarin became the Greatest Man in the World , for a nation that does not believe in the cult of personality or in careerism , Moreland wrote me a letter in which he said : `` I am not interested in how long a bee can live in a vacuum , or how far it can fly . A bee's place is in the hive '' . `` I have come to talk with you about the future of humor and comedy '' , I told him , at which he started slightly , and then made us each a stiff drink , with a trembling hand . `` I seem to remember '' , he said , `` that in an interview ten years ago you gave humor and comedy five years to live . Did you go to their funeral '' ? ? `` I was wrong '' , I admitted . `` Comedy didn't die , it just went crazy . It has identified itself with the very tension and terror it once did so much to alleviate . We now have not only what has been called over here the comedy of menace but we also have horror jokes , magazines known as Horror Comics , and sick comedians . There are even publications called Sick and Mad . The Zeitgeist is not crazy as a loon or mad as a March hare ; ; it is manic as a man '' . `` I woke up this morning '' , Moreland said , `` paraphrasing Lewis Carroll . Do you want to hear the paraphrase '' ? ? `` Can I bear it '' ? ? I asked , taking a final gulp of my drink , and handing him the empty glass . `` Just barely '' , he said , and repeated his paraphrase : `` The time has come '' , the walrus said , `` To speak of manic things , Of shots and shouts , and sealing dooms Of commoners and kings '' . Moreland fixed us each another drink , and said , `` For God's sake , tell me something truly amusing '' . `` I'll try '' , I said , and sat for a moment thinking . `` Oh yes , the other day I reread some of Emerson's English Traits , and there was an anecdote about a group of English and Americans visiting Germany , more than a hundred years ago . In the railway station at Berlin , a uniformed attendant was chanting , ' Foreigners this way ! ! Foreigners this way ' ! ! One woman -- she could have been either English or American -- went up to him and said , ' But you are the foreigners ' '' . I took a deep breath and an even deeper swallow of my drink , and said , `` I admit that going back to Ralph Waldo Emerson for humor is like going to a modern musical comedy for music and comedy '' . `` What's the matter with the music '' ? ? Moreland asked . `` It doesn't drown out the dialogue '' , I explained . `` Let's talk about books '' , Moreland said . `` I am told that in America you have non-books by non-writers , brought out by non-publishers for non-readers . Is it all non-fiction '' ? ? `` There is non-fiction and non non-fiction '' , I said . `` Speaking of nonism : the other day , in a story about a sit-down demonstration , the Paris Herald Tribune wrote , ' The non-violence became noisier . And then Eichmann was quoted as saying , in non-English , that Hitler's plan to exterminate the Jews was nonsense '' . `` If we cannot tell evil , horror , and insanity from nonsense , what is the future of humor and comedy '' ? ? Moreland asked , grimly . `` Cryptic '' , I said . `` They require , for existence , a brave spirit and a high heart , and where do you find these ? ? In our present era of Science and Angst , the heart has been downgraded , to use one of our popular retrogressive verbs '' . `` I know what you mean '' , Moreland sighed . `` Last year your Tennessee Williams told our Dilys Powell , in a television program , that it is the task of the playwright to throw light into the dark corners of the human heart . Like almost everybody else , he confused the heart , both as organ and as symbol , with the disturbed psyche , the deranged glands , and the jumpy central nervous system . I'm not pleading for the heart that leaps up when it beholds a rainbow in the sky , or for the heart that with rapture fills and dances with the daffodils . The sentimental pure heart of Galahad is gone with the knightly years , but I still believe in the heart of the George Meredith character that was not made of the stuff that breaks '' . `` We no longer have Tom Moore's and Longfellow's ' heart for any fate ' , either '' , I said . `` Moore and Longfellow didn't have the fate that faces us '' , Moreland said . `` One day our species promises co-existence , and the next day it threatens co-extinction '' . We sat for a while drinking in silence . `` The heart '' , I said finally , `` is now either in the throat or the mouth or the stomach or the shoes . When it was worn in the breast , or even on the sleeve , we at least knew where it was '' . There was a long silence . `` You have visited England five times in the past quarter-century , I believe '' , my host said . `` What has impressed you most on your present visit '' ? ? `` I would say depressed , not impressed '' , I told him . `` I should say it is the turning of courts of law into veritable theatres for sex dramas , involving clergymen and parishioners , psychiatrists and patients . It is becoming harder and harder to tell law courts and political arenas from the modern theatre '' . `` Do you think we need a new Henry James to re-explore the Anglo-American scene '' ? ? He asked . `` Or perhaps a new Noel Coward '' ? ? `` But you must have heard it said that the drawing-room disappeared forever with the somnolent years of James and the antic heyday of Coward . I myself hear it said constantly -- in drawing-rooms . In them , there is usually a group of Anglo-Americans with tragicomic problems , worthy of being explored either in the novel or in the play or in comedy and satire '' . I stood up and began pacing . `` If you are trying to get us out of the brothel , the dustbin , the kitchen sink , and the tawdry living-room , you are probably wasting your time '' , Moreland told me . `` Too many of our writers seem to be interested only in creatures that crawl out of the woodwork or from under the rock '' . `` Furiouser and furiouser '' , I said . `` I am worried about the current meanings of the word funny . It now means ominous , as when one speaks of a funny sound in the motor ; ; disturbing , as when one says that a friend is acting funny ; ; and frightening , as when a wife tells the police that it is funny , but her husband hasn't been home for two days and nights '' . Moreland sat brooding for a full minute , during which I made each of us a new drink . He took his glass , clinked it against mine , and said , `` Toujours gai , what the hell '' ! ! Borrowing a line from Don Marquis' Mehitabel . `` Be careful of the word ' gay ' , for it , too , has undergone a change . It now means , in my country , homosexual '' , I said . `` Oh , I forgot to say that if one is taken to the funny house in the funny wagon , he is removed to a mental institution in an ambulance . Recently , by the way , I received a questionnaire in which I was asked whether or not I was non-institutionalized '' . My host went over and stared out the window at his peacocks ; ; then he turned to me . `` Is it true that you believe the other animals are saner than the human species '' ? ? `` Oh , that is demonstrable '' , I told him . `` Do you remember the woman in the French Alps who was all alone with her sheep one day when the sun darkened ominously ? ? She told the sheep , ' The world is coming to an end ' ! ! And the sheep said -- all in unison , I have no doubt -- ba-a-a ! ! The sound mockery of sheep is like the salubrious horse laugh '' . `` That is only partly non-nonsense '' , he began . `` If you saw the drama called Rhinoceros '' , I said , `` think of the effect it would have on an audience of rhinos when the actor on stage suddenly begins turning into a rhinoceros . The rhinos would panic , screaming help ! ! -- if that can be screamed in their language '' . `` You think the Russians are getting ahead of us in comedy '' ? ? Moreland demanded . `` Non-God , no '' , I said . `` The political and intellectual Left began fighting humor and comedy years ago , because they fear things they do not understand and cannot manage , such as satire and irony , such as humor and comedy . Nevertheless , like any other human being upon whom the spotlight of the world plays continually , Khrushchev , the anti-personality cultist , has become a comic actor , or thinks he has . In his famous meeting with Nixon a couple of years ago he seemed to believe that he was as funny as Ed Wynn . But , like Caesar , he has only one joke , so far as I can find out . It consists in saying , ' That would be sending the goat to look after the cabbage . Why in the name of his non-God doesn't he vary it a bit '' ? ? `` Such as '' ? ? Moreland asked . `` Such as ' sending the cat to guard the mice ' , or ' the falcon to protect the dove ' , or most terribly sharp of all , ' the human being to save humanity ' '' . `` You and I have fallen out of literature into politics '' , Moreland observed . `` What a nasty fall was there '' ! ! I said . Moreland went over to stare at his peacocks again , and then came back and sat down , restively . `` The world that was once foot-loose and fancy-free '' , he said , `` has now become screw-loose and frenzy-free . In our age of Science and Angst it seems to me more brave to stay on Earth and explore inner man than to fly far from the sphere of our sorrow and explore outer space '' . `` The human ego being what it is '' , I put in , `` science fiction has always assumed that the creatures on the planets of a thousand larger solar systems than ours must look like gigantic tube-nosed fruit bats . It seems to me that the first human being to reach one of these planets may well learn what it is to be a truly great and noble species '' . `` Now we are leaving humor and comedy behind again '' , Moreland protested . `` Not in the largest sense of the words '' , I said . `` The other day Arnold Toynbee spoke against the inveterate tendency of our species to believe in the uniqueness of its religions , its ideologies , and its virtually everything else . Why do we not realize that no ideology believes so much in itself as it disbelieves in something else ? ? Forty years ago an English writer , W. L. George , dealt with this subject in Eddies of the Day , and said , as an example , that ' Saint George for Merry England ' would not start a spirit half so quickly as ' Strike frog-eating Frenchmen dead ' '' ! ! `` There was also Gott strafe Angleterre '' , Moreland reminded me , `` and Carthago delenda est , or if you will , Deus strafe Carthage . It isn't what the ideologist believes in , but what he hates , that puts the world in jeopardy . This is the force , in our time and in every other time , that urges the paranoiac and the manic-depressive to become head of a state . Complete power not only corrupts but it also attracts the mad . There is a bitter satire for a future writer in that '' . `` Great satire has always been clearly written and readily understandable '' , I said . `` But we now find writers obsessed by the nooks and crannies of their ivory towers , and curiously devoted to the growing obscurity and complexity of poetry and non-poetry . I wrote a few years ago that one of the cardinal rules of writing is that the reader should be able to get some idea of what the story is about . One day , the children had wanted to get up onto General Burnside's horse . They wanted to see what his back felt like -- the General's . He looked so comfortable being straight . They wanted to touch the mystery . Arlene was boosting them up when the policeman came by . He was very rude . Arlene had a hard voice , too , this time . The policeman's eyes rather popped for a second ; ; but then Arlene got another tone in a hurry , and she said , `` If it wasn't for these dear children '' -- . The policeman got a confused , funny look on his face , and he had answered kind of politely , `` Now , look here , lady : I know you got to entertain these kids and all . But this is a public park and it's a city ordinance that the statues cannot be crawled on '' . Arlene was so ashamed that she hung her head when she said , `` Yes , sir '' . The policeman walked on , but he looked back once . That had happened on the day when two other unusual things had occurred . Arlene had taught them a new way to have fun in their little private area ; ; and they had told their mother about the tumbles . In matters of exact information , that kept her one step behind developments ; ; and so they were consistently true to their principles . `` Never mind '' , Arlene had said , after the policeman had left , having pursued the usual unco-operative course of grownups . `` Never mind . I know something that is much more fun that we can do on our little lawn '' . `` What is it '' ? ? Asked the children , whose reflexes and replies were invariably so admirably normal and predictable . Maybe that was why they were cordial and loyal towards the unpredictability of Arlene . `` Just you wait '' , advised Arlene , echoing the dialogue in a recent British movie . And when they had got to their little lawn , they had had a most twirlingly magnificent time . First , Arlene had put them through some rapid somersaults . They had protested that that wasn't any surprise . `` Just you wait '' , said Arlene again , as though she were discovering the pleasantly tingling insinuations of that handy little sturdy statement . `` This is a warm-up '' . `` Is it anything like cooked-over oatmeal '' ? ? Asked one of the children . `` Not the least bit '' , Arlene snapped . One of the many things that was so nice about her was that she always took your questions seriously , particularly your very , very serious questions . Those were especially the ones that all other grownups laughed at loudest . She would sometimes even get a little hard on you , she took you so seriously . But not hard for very long . Just long enough to make you feel important . `` Now '' , said Arlene , eventually , making them both sit in formation on a big root of a live oak , the sort of root that divided itself and made their bottoms sag down and feel comfortable . `` Now , we're going to be like what General Burnside and his horse make us think of '' . The children looked at each other and sagged their bottoms down even more comfortably than ever . Their curiosity went happily out of bounds . Then , Arlene threw herself backwards and wiggled in a way that was just wonderful . She held herself that way and turned her head towards them and laughed and winked . `` Imagine being able to laugh and wink when you're like the top part of that picture frame at home '' , one of them said . They both laughed and winked back . `` I'm General Burnside's horse , upside down '' , Arlene said , sort of gaspingly , for her : even she had to breathe kind of funny when she was in that position . She made General Burnside's horse's belly do so funny when it was upside down . Then , she was back on her feet , winking and smiling that enormous smile ( she had lots of wonderful big teeth that you never would have suspected she had when she was not smiling ) . And she would wink and throw kisses . They both tried to keep smiling and winking for a long time , but it made their lips and eyelids tremble . But they kept on clapping for a long , long time . `` This time '' , Arlene said , and she even kept on wiggling a little bit while she was just talking , `` you're going to tell me what I am and what I'm doing . It all has something to do with General Burnside and his horse '' . This time , it was so grand ; ; they could tell exactly what it was . It was General Burnside's horse running in a circle . His legs shook , and the shaking went right on up his body through his hips to his shoulders . `` That's the General's horse '' , one of them cried out . The other remarked , in a happy laughter , `` That's a funny old horse '' . The first one said , `` He sure does shake . He's old '' . Then there was the General kissing his wife . They had to be told that one . But it was even funnier after they had been told . Their father , when he came back from those many business trips , just bumped their mother on the forehead with his lips and asked if anybody had thought to mix the martinis and put them in the electric icebox . But not General Burnside . He was the funniest man . He never could keep still , even when he didn't move his feet . Then , they had to get up and be General Burnside . Or his horse . All they could think of was to run around in circles , kicking their legs out . It wasn't very funny . Then , they said General Burnside was going to jump over his horse's head ; ; and they did some somersaults . But that wasn't very funny , either . `` You ought to shake '' , Arlene advised them . And Arlene showed them how to begin . She also taught them to sing `` I wish I could shimmy like my sister Kate '' . That helped a lot . They were clumsy , but they were beginning to catch on . They also caught on a little bit on how to smile a lot without your lips trembling . `` Imagine you won't get your allowance if you're caught not smiling -- or smiling with your lips trembling too much '' , Arlene suggested . That helped a great deal . They were a little late in getting home . `` I'm sorry , Mrs. Minks '' , Arlene said in a tone so low you could hardly hear it . My mother constituted herself the voice of all of us . `` It's perfectly understandable , Arlene '' , my mother said in a friendly way . `` I suppose you all were playing and forgot '' ? ? `` Yes , ma'am '' , the children chorused heartily . We couldn't help laughing . The children rushed off to get rid of their sweaters ; ; and Arlene began tapping the kitchen door open . `` Arlene's a good girl '' , my uncle remarked to us ; ; but he said it too soon , for it came out just before the tap to which the door responded . That tap had a slight bangish quality . `` She really is a dear little thing '' , my mother agreed . Her upper lip lifted slightly . She was biting into a small red radish ; ; and that action always caused her to lift her lip from the sting of the thing . Also , she lived in continual fear of finding a white worm curled up in a neat , mean little heap at the white center of the radish . She would try to see over the bulge of her cheeks and somewhat under her teeth to the place where she was biting . It never worked , naturally ; ; but it made her look unusual . Also , when she had bitten off half of the small radish , she found the suspense unbearable ; ; and she would snatch the finger-held half of the radish out to where she could inspect it . One could hear a very faint , ladylike sigh of relief . Actually , it was inaudible to anyone not expecting it . But the warm joy of her brown eyes was open to the general public . Later on , the children told her further about somersaulting . `` It must be awfully good for them . And awfully kind of Arlene '' , she told us later . `` But do you know something curious '' ? ? She added . `` I reached into that funny little pocket that is high up on my dress . I have no notion why I reached . And I found a radish . Was it an omen ? ? I thought for a second . But I would not pamper myself in that silly way . I opened the window and threw the radish out '' . Then , my mother blushed at this small lie ; ; for she knew and we knew that it was cowardice that had made one more radish that night just too impossible a strain . Arlene became indispensable ; ; nobody could have told why . But she was . It was in the air . A friend of my father's came to dinner . He was passing through town and phoned to say hello . As a result , he was persuaded out to dinner . As a matter of fact , this happened every four or five months . Sometimes , he coincided with my father's being at home . Sometimes , as at this juncture , he did not . But he was always persuaded out . He liked children , in a loathsome kind of way ; ; the two youngest in our family always had to be brought in and put through tricks for his entertainment . When he had left , I could never remember whether he had poked them in their middles , laughingly , with a thick index finger or whether he was merely so much the sort of person who did this that one assumed the action , not bothering to look . The children loathed him , too . This evening , they were pushed in from the breakfast room , with odds and ends of dessert distributed over them . There had been some coconut in it , for I remember my mother's taking a quick glance at a stringy bit of this nut on the cheek of one of them and then putting down her radish with a shiver . They were pushed gently into the room by Arlene -- whose only part appearing were hands that crept quickly back around to the kitchen side of the door . We had just sat down . `` Tell Mr. Gorboduc what you're doing these days '' , my mother advised the children , ceremonially . There was an air of revolt about the children -- even irreverence for their own principles . This could be told chiefly from a sort of head-tossing and prancing , a horselike balkiness of demeanor . Possibly , the coconut-containing dessert had brought up bitter problems of administration . But , at the beginning , this stayed just in the air . `` We go to the park with this nice lady '' , one of them said . `` We have good times '' . This happy bulletin convulsed Mr. Gorboduc . `` You do '' ? ? He asked , between wheezes of laughter . He was forced to wipe his eyes . `` You don't step on the flowers , do you ? ? Eh '' ? ? One of the children maneuvered out of range of the poking index finger . `` No '' , he said . `` We don't '' . Mr. Gorboduc took a swig of his sherry . He was so long thinking that my mother had time to inspect her sherry for dregs . Usually , this was done when attention was diverted by someone else's long , boring story . But this time she was nervous : she was open . Mr. Gorboduc was finally in command of his mind again . `` Tell me -- what do you do at the park '' ? ? He asked . This was delivered in a forthright way , without coyness and over-pretended interest -- an admirable way with children . Only , unfortunately , he could not remove from his voice a nagging insinuation of the direct command . This nettled the children into the revelation of exact truth , a sacrifice of their secret superiority over grown people , but a victory in the wide fields of perpetration and illegitimate accomplishment . `` We bump '' , one said ; ; and the other went on to development of the idea . `` We grind , too '' , he said . My mother was beside herself with curiosity . `` Say that again '' , she pleaded . She laughed a little and tossed the dregs rakishly around in her glass . `` You what '' ? ? She could see that Mr. Gorboduc was intrigued ; ; the hostess in her took over . She was rollickingly happy . `` You what '' ? ? My uncle looked at Mr. Gorboduc . He read Henry James and used to pretend profundity through eye-beamings at people . Mr. Gorboduc looked down . He would not look up . He was very funny about the whole thing . Pueri aquam de silvas ad agricolas portant , a delightful vignette set in the unforgettable epoch of pre-Punic War Rome . Marcellus , the hero , is beset from all sides by the problems of approaching manhood . The story opens on the eve of his fifty-third birthday , as he prepares for the two weeks of festivities that are to follow . Suddenly , a messenger arrives and , just before collapsing dead at his feet , informs him that the Saracens have invaded Silesia , the home province of his affianced . He at once cancels the celebrations and , buckling on his scimitar , stumbles blindly from the house , where he is hit and killed by a passing oxcart . The Albany Civic Opera's presentation of Spumoni's immortal Il Sevigli del Spegititgninino , with guest contralto Hattie Sforzt . An unusual , if not extraordinary , rendering of the classic myth that involves the rescue of Prometheus from the rock by the U.S. Cavalry was given last week in the warehouse of the Albany Leather Conduit Company amid cheers of `` Hubba hubba '' and `` Yalagaloo pip pip '' ! ! After a `` busy '' overture , the curtain rises on a farm scene -- the Ranavan Valley in northern Maine . A dead armadillo , the sole occupant of the stage , symbolizes the crisis and destruction of the Old Order . Old Order , acted and atonally sung by Grunnfeu Arapacis , the lovely Serbantian import , then entered and delivered the well-known invocation to the god Phineoppus , whereupon the stage is quite unexpectedly visited by a company of wandering Gorshek priests , symbolizing Love , Lust , Prudence and General Motors , respectively . According to the myth , Old Order then vanishes at stage left and reappears at extreme stage right , but Director Shuz skillfully sidesteps the rather gooshey problem of stage effects by simply having Miss Arapacis walk across the stage . The night he saw it , a rather unpleasant situation arose when the soloist refused to approach the armadillo , complaining -- in ad-lib -- that `` it smelled '' . We caught the early train to New York . The Dharma Dictionary , a list of highly unusual terms used in connection with Eurasian proto-senility cults . It's somewhat off the beaten track , to be sure , but therein lies its variety and charm . For example , probably very few people know that the word `` visrhanik '' that is bantered about so much today stems from the verb `` bouanahsha '' : to salivate . Likewise , and equally fascinating , is the news that such unlikely synonyms as `` pratakku '' , `` sweathruna '' , and the tongue-twister `` nnuolapertar-it-vuh-karti-birifw- '' all originated in the same village in Bathar-on-Walli Province and are all used to express sentiments concerning British `` imperialism '' . The terms are fairly safe to use on this side of the ocean , but before you start spouting them to your date , it might be best to find out if he was a member of Major Pockmanster's Delhi Regiment , since resentment toward the natives was reportedly very high in that outfit . The breeze and chancellor Neitzbohr , a movie melodrama that concerns the attempts of a West German politician to woo a plaster cast of the Apollo Belvedere . As you have doubtless guessed already , the plot is plastered with Freudian , Jungian , and Meinckian theory . For example , when the film is only four minutes old , Neitzbohr refers to a small , Victorian piano stool as `` Wilhelmina '' , and we are thereupon subjected to a flashback that informs us that this very piano stool was once used by an epileptic governess whose name , of course , was Doris ( the English equivalent , when passed through middle-Gaelic derivations , of Wilhelmina ) . For the remainder of the movie , Chancellor Neitzbohr proceeds to lash the piano stool with a slat from a Venetian blind that used to hang in the pre-war Reichstag . In this manner , he seeks to expunge from his own soul the guilt pangs caused by his personal assaults against the English at Dunkirk . As we find out at the end , it is not the stool ( symbolizing Doris , therefore the English ) that he is punishing but the piece of Venetian blind . And , when the slat finally shatters , we see him count the fragments , all the while muttering , `` He loves me , he loves me not '' . After a few tortuous moments of wondering who `` he '' is , the camera pans across the room to the plaster statue , and we realize that Neitzbohr is trying to redeem himself in the eyes of a mute piece of sculpture . The effect , needless to say , is almost terrifying , and though at times a bit obscure , the film is certainly a much-needed catharsis for the `` repressed '' movie-goer . The music of Bini SalFininistas , capital LP Ab63711-r , one of the rare recordings of this titanic , yet unsung , composer . Those persons who were lucky enough to see and hear the performance of his work at the Brest-Silevniov Festival in August , 1916 , will certainly welcome his return to public notice ; ; and it is not unlikely that , even as the great Bach lay dormant for so many years , so has the erudite , ingenious SalFininistas passed through his `` purgatory '' of neglect . But now , under the guidance of the contemporary composer Marc Schlek , Jr. , a major revival is under way . As he leads the Neurenschatz Skolkau Orchestra , Schlek gives a tremendously inspired performance of both the Baslot and Rattzhenfuut concertos , including the controversial Tschilwyk cadenza , which was included at the conductor's insistence . A major portion of the credit should also go to flautist Haumd for his rendering of the almost impossible `` Indianapolis '' movement in the Baslot . Not only was Haumd's intonation and phrasing without flaw , but he seemed to take every tonal eccentricity in stride . For example , to move ( as the score requires ) from the lowest F-major register up to a barely audible N minor in four seconds , not skipping , at the same time , even one of the 407 fingerings , seems a feat too absurd to consider , and it is to the flautist's credit that he remained silent throughout the passage . We would have preferred , however , to have had the rest of the orchestra refrain from laughing at this and other spots on the recording , since it mars an otherwise sober , if not lofty , performance . As Broadway itself becomes increasingly weighted down by trite , heavy-handed , commercially successful musicals and inspirational problem dramas , the American theatre is going through an inexorable renaissance in that nebulous area known as `` off-Broadway '' . For the last two years , this frontier of the arts has produced a number of so-called `` non-dramas '' which have left indelible , bittersweet impressions on the psyche of this veteran theatregoer . The latest and , significantly , greatest fruit of this theatrical vine is The , an adaptation of Basho's classic frog-haiku by Roger Entwhistle , a former University of Maryland chemistry instructor . Although the play does show a certain structural amateurishness ( there are eleven acts varying in length from twenty-five seconds to an hour and a half ) , the statement it makes concerning the ceaseless yearning and searching of youth is profound and worthy of our attention . The action centers about a group of outspoken and offbeat students sitting around a table in a cafeteria and their collective and ultimately fruitless search for a cup of hot coffee . They are relentlessly rebuffed on all sides by a waitress , the police , and an intruding government tutor . The innocence that they tried to conceal at the beginning is clearly destroyed forever when one of them , asking for a piece of lemon-meringue pie , gets a plate of English muffins instead . Leaving the theatre after the performance , I had a flash of intuition that life , after all ( as Rilke said ) , is just a search for the nonexistent cup of hot coffee , and that this unpretentious , moving , clever , bitter slice of life was the greatest thing to happen to the American theatre since Brooks Atkinson retired . Aging but still precocious , French feline enfant terrible Francoisette Lagoon has succeeded in shocking jaded old Paris again , this time with a sexy ballet scenario called The Lascivious Interlude , the story of a nymphomaniac trip-hammer operator who falls hopelessly in love with a middle-aged steam shovel . A biting , pithy parable of the all-pervading hollowness of modern life , the piece has been set by Mlle Lagoon to a sumptuous score ( a single motif played over and over by four thousand French horns ) by existentialist hot-shot Jean-Paul Sartre . Petite , lovely Yvette Chadroe plays the nymphomaniac engagingly . Ever since Bambi , and , more recently , Born Free , there have been a lot of books about animals , but few compare with Max Fink's wry , understated , charming , and immensely readable My Friend , the Quizzical Salamander . Done in the modern style of a `` confession '' , Fink tells in exquisite detail how he came to know , and , more important , love his mother's pet salamander , Alicia . It is not an entirely happy book , as Mrs. Fink soon becomes jealous of Alicia and , in retaliation , refuses to continue to scrape the algae off her glass . Max , in a fit of despair , takes Alicia and runs off for two marvelous weeks in Burbank ( Fink calls it `` the most wonderful and lovely fourteen days in my whole life '' ) , at the end of which Alicia tragically contracts Parkinson's disease and dies . This brief resume hardly does the book justice , but I heartily recommend it to all those who are engages with the major problems of our time . Opera in the Grand Tradition , along with mah-jongg , seems to be staging a well-deserved comeback . In this country , the two guiding lights are , without doubt , Felix Fing and Anna Pulova . Fing , a lean , chiseled , impeccable gentleman of the old school who was once mistaken on the street for Sir Cedric Hardwicke , is responsible for the rediscovery of Verdi's earliest , most raucous opera , Nabisco , a sumptuous bout-de-souffle with a haunting leitmotiv that struck me as being highly reminiscent of the Mudugno version of `` Volare '' . Miss Pulova has a voice that Maria Callas once described as `` like chipping teeth with a screw driver '' , and her round , opalescent face becomes fascinatingly reflective of the emotions demanded by the role of Rosalie . The Champs Elysees is literally littered this summer with the prostrate bodies of France's beat-up beatnik jeunes filles . Cause of all this commotion : squat , pug-nosed , balding , hopelessly ugly Jean-Pierre Bravado , a Bogartian figure , who plays a sadistic , amoral , philosophic Tasti-Freeze salesman in old New-Waver Fredrico de Mille Rossilini's endlessly provocative film , A Sour Sponge . Bravado has been alternately described as `` a symbol of the new grandeur of France and myself '' ( De Gaulle ) and `` a decadent , disgusting slob '' ! ! ( Norman Mailer ) , but no one can deny that the screen crackles with electricity whenever he is on it . Soaring to stardom along with him , Margo Felicity Brighetti , a luscious and curvaceously beguiling Italian starlet , turns in a creditable performance as an airplane mechanic . The battle of the drib-drool continues , but most of New York's knowing sophisticates of Abstract Expressionism are stamping their feet impatiently in expectation of V ( for Vindication ) Day , September first , when Augustus Quasimodo's first one-man show opens at the Guggenheim . We have heard that after seeing Mr. Quasimodo's work it will be virtually impossible to deny the artistic validity and importance of the whole abstract movement . And it is thought by many who think about such things that Quasimodo is the logical culmination of a school that started with Monet , progressed through Kandinsky and the cubist Picasso , and blossomed just recently in Pollock and De Kooning . Quasimodo defines his own art as `` the search for what is not there '' . `` I paint the nothing '' , he said once to Franz Kline and myself , `` the nothing that is behind the something , the inexpressible , unpaintable ' tick ' in the unconscious , the ' spirit ' of the moment resting forever , suspended like a huge balloon , in non-time '' . It is his relentlessness and unwaivering adherence to this revolutionary artistic philosophy that has enabled him to paint such pictures as `` The Invasion of Cuba '' . In this work , his use of non-color is startling and skillful . The sweep of space , the delicate counterbalance of the white masses , the over-all completeness and unity , the originality and imagination , all entitle it to be called an authentic masterpiece . I asked Quasimodo recently how he accomplished this , and he replied that he had painted his model `` a beautiful shade of red and then had her breathe on the canvas '' , which was his typical tongue-in-cheek way of chiding me for my lack of sensitivity . Dear Sirs : Let me begin by clearing up any possible misconception in your minds , wherever you are . The collective by which I address you in the title above is neither patronizing nor jocose but an exact industrial term in use among professional thieves . It is , I am reliably given to understand , the technical argot for those who engage in your particular branch of the boost ; ; i.e. , burglars who rob while the tenants are absent , in contrast to hot-slough prowlers , those who work while the occupants are home . Since the latter obviously require an audacity you do not possess , you may perhaps suppose that I am taunting you as socially inferior . Far from it ; ; I merely draw an etymological distinction , hoping that specialists and busy people like you will welcome such precision in a layman . Above all , disabuse yourselves of any thought that I propose to vent moral indignation at your rifling my residence , to whimper over the loss of a few objets d'art , or to shame you into rectitude . My object , rather , is to alert you to an aspect or two of the affair that could have the gravest implications for you , far beyond the legal sanctions society might inflict . You have unwittingly set in motion forces so malign , so vindictive , that it would be downright inhumane of me not to warn you about them . Quite candidly , fellows , I wouldn't be in your shoes for all the rice in China . As you've doubtless forgotten the circumstances in the press of more recent depredations , permit me to recapitulate them briefly . Sometime on Saturday evening , August 22nd , while my family and I were dining at the Hostaria dell' Orso , in Rome , you jimmied a window of our home in Bucks County , Pennsylvania , and let yourselves into the premises . Hastening to the attic , the temperature of which was easily hotter than the Gold Coast , you proceeded to mask the windows with a fancy wool coverlet , some khaki pants , and the like , and to ransack the innumerable boxes and barrels stored there . What you were looking for ( unless you make a hobby of collecting old tennis rackets and fly screens ) eludes me , but to judge from phonograph records scattered about a fumed-oak Victrola . You danced two tangos and a paso doble , which must have been fairly enervating in that milieu . You then descended one story , glommed a television set from the music room -- the only constructive feature of your visit , by the way -- and , returning to the ground floor , entered the master bedroom . From the curio cabinet on its south wall and the bureaus beneath , you abstracted seventeen ivory , metal , wood , and stone sculptures of Oriental and African origin , two snuffboxes , and a jade-handled magnifying glass . Rummaging through a stack of drawers nearby , you unearthed an antique French chess set in ivory and sandalwood , which , along with two box Kodaks , you added to your haul . Then , having wrapped the lot in an afghan my dog customarily slept on , you lammed out the front door , considerately leaving it open for neighbors to discover . So much for the tiresome facts , as familiar to you , I'm sure , as to the constables and state troopers who followed in your wake . The foregoing , aided by several clues I'll withhold to keep you on your toes , will pursue you with a tenacity worthy of Inspector Javert , but before they close in , gird yourselves , I repeat , for a vengeance infinitely more pitiless . Fourteen of the sculptures you took possess properties of a most curious and terrifying nature , as you will observe when your limbs begin to wither and your hair falls out in patches . In time , these minor manifestations will multiply and effloresce , riddling you with frambesia , the king's evil , sheep rot , and clonic spasm , until your very existence becomes a burden and you cry out for release . All this , though , is simply a prelude , a curtain-raiser , for what ensues , and I doubt whether any Occidental could accurately forecast it . If , however , it would help to intensify your anguish , I can delimit the powers of a few of the divinities you've affronted and describe the punishment they meted out in one analogous instance . Hold on tight . First of all , the six figures of the Buddha you heisted -- four Siamese heads , a black obsidian statuette in the earth-touching position , and a large brass figure of the Dying Buddha on a teakwood base . Now , you probably share the widespread Western belief that the Lord Buddha is the most compassionate of the gods , much more so than Jehovah and Allah and the rest . 'fess up -- don't you ? ? Well , ordinarily he is , except ( as the Wheel of the Law specifies ) toward impious folk who steal , disturb , or maltreat the Presence . Very peculiar retribution indeed seems to overtake such jokers . Eight or ten years ago , a couple of French hoods stole a priceless Khmer head from the Musee Guimet , in Paris , and a week later crawled into the Salpetriere with unmistakable symptoms of leprosy . Hell's own amount of chaulmoogra oil did nothing to alleviate their torment ; ; they expired amid indescribable fantods , imploring the Blessed One to forgive their desecration . Any reputable French interne can supply you with a dozen similar instances , and I'll presently recount a case out of my own personal experience , but , for the moment , let's resume our catalogue . Whether the pair of Sudanese ivory carvings you lifted really possess the juju to turn your livers to lead , as a dealer in Khartoum assured me , I am not competent to say . Likewise the ivory Chinese female figure known as a `` doctor lady '' ( provenance Honan ) ; ; a friend of mine removing her from the curio cabinet for inspection was felled as if by a hammer , but he had previously drunk a quantity of applejack . The three Indian brass deities , though -- Ganessa , Siva , and Krishna -- are an altogether different cup of tea . They hail from Travancore , a state in the subcontinent where Kali , the goddess of death , is worshiped . Have you ever heard of Thuggee ? ? Nuf sed . But it is the wooden sculpture from Bali , the one representing two men with their heads bent backward and their bodies interlaced by a fish , that I particularly call to your attention . Oddly enough , this is an amulet against housebreakers , presented to the mem and me by a local rajah in 1949 . Inscribed around its base is a charm in Balinese , a dialect I take it you don't comprehend . Neither do I , but the Tjokorda Agoeng was good enough to translate , and I'll do as much for you . Whosoever violates our rooftree , the legend states , can expect maximal sorrow . The teeth will rain from his mouth like pebbles , his wife will make him cocu with fishmongers , and a trolley car will grow in his stomach . Furthermore -- and this , to me , strikes an especially warming note -- it shall avail the vandals naught to throw away or dispose of their loot . The cycle of disaster starts the moment they touch any belonging of ours , and dogs them unto the forty-fifth generation . Sort of remorseless , isn't it ? ? Still , there it is . Now , you no doubt regard the preceding as pap ; ; you're tooling around full of gage in your hot rods , gorging yourselves on pizza and playing pinball in the taverns and generally behaving like Ubermenschen . In that case , listen to what befell another wisenheimer who tangled with our joss . A couple of years back , I occupied a Village apartment whose outer staircase contained the type of niche called a `` coffin turn '' . In it was a stone Tibetan Buddha I had picked up in Bombay , and occasionally , to make merit , my wife and I garlanded it with flowers or laid a few pennies in its lap . After a while , we became aware that the money was disappearing as fast as we replenished it . Our suspicions eventually centered , by the process of elimination , on a grocer's boy , a thoroughly bad hat , who delivered cartons to the people overhead . The more I probed into this young man's activities and character , the less savory I found him . I learned , for example , that he made a practice of yapping at dogs he encountered and , in winter , of sprinkling salt on the icy pavement to scarify their feet . His energy was prodigious ; ; sometimes he would be up before dawn , clad as a garbage collector and hurling pails into areaways to exasperate us , and thereafter would hurry to the Bronx Zoo to grimace at the lions and press cigar butts against their paws . Evenings , he was frequently to be seen at restaurants like Enrico & Paglieri's or Peter's Backyard drunkenly donning ladies' hats and singing `` O Sole Mio '' . In short , and to borrow an arboreal phrase , slash timber . Well , the odious little toad went along chivying animals and humans who couldn't retaliate , and in due course , as was inevitable , overreached himself . One morning , we discovered not only that the pennies were missing from the idol but that a cigarette had been stubbed out in its lap . `` Now he's bought it '' , said my wife contentedly . `` No divinity will hold still for that . He's really asking for it '' . And how right she was . The next time we saw him , he was a changed person ; ; he had aged thirty years , and his face , the color of tallow , was crisscrossed with wrinkles , as though it had been wrapped in chicken wire . Some sort of nemesis was haunting his footsteps , he told us in a quavering voice -- either an ape specter or Abe Spector , a process-server , we couldn't determine which . His eyes had the same dreadful rigid stare as Dr. Grimesby Roylott's when he was found before his open safe wearing the speckled band . The grocery the youth worked for soon tired of his depressing effect on customers , most of whom were sufficiently neurotic without the threat of incubi , and let him go . The beautiful , the satisfying part of his disintegration , however , was the masterly way the Buddha polished him off . Reduced to beggary , he at last got a job as office boy to a television producer . His hubris , deficiency of taste , and sadism carried him straightaway to the top . He evolved programs that plumbed new depths of bathos and besmirched whole networks , and quickly superseded his boss . Not long ago , I rode down with him in an elevator in Radio City ; ; he was talking to himself thirteen to the dozen and smoking two cigars at once , clearly a man in extremis . `` See that guy '' ? ? The operator asked pityingly . `` I wouldn't be in his shoes for all the rice in China . There's some kind of a nemesis haunting his footsteps '' . However one looks at it , therefore , I'd say that your horoscope for this autumn is the reverse of rosy . The inventory you acquired from me isn't going to be easy to move ; ; you can't very well sidle up to people on the street and ask if they want to buy a hot Bodhisattva . Additionally , since you're going to be hors de combat pretty soon with sprue , yaws , Delhi boil , the Granville wilt , liver fluke , bilharziasis , and a host of other complications of the hex you've aroused , you mustn't expect to be lionized socially . My advice , if you live long enough to continue your vocation , is that the next time you're attracted by the exotic , pass it up -- it's nothing but a headache . As you can count on me to do the same . Compassionately yours , S. J. Perelman revulsion in the desert the doors of the D train slid shut , and as I dropped into a seat and , exhaling , looked up across the aisle , the whole aviary in my head burst into song . She was a living doll and no mistake -- the blue-black bang , the wide cheekbones , olive-flushed , that betrayed the Cherokee strain in her Midwestern lineage , and the mouth whose only fault , in the novelist's carping phrase , was that the lower lip was a trifle too voluptuous . From what I was able to gauge in a swift , greedy glance , the figure inside the coral-colored boucle dress was stupefying .